[Amit Varma]: I have often asked myself the question, what does it mean to be Indian? In recent weeks,
[Amit Varma]: I have also started asking myself the question, what does it mean to be an Indian citizen?
[Amit Varma]: We often take it for granted that we are citizens, but citizenship has so many rich shades of
[Amit Varma]: meaning. On the one hand, it's an administrative category, denoting the basic unit of the population
[Amit Varma]: of a state. On another, it's a term loaded with virtue and duty, which is why we speak
[Amit Varma]: of what it means to be a good citizen. The term citizen refers to a legal status. It
[Amit Varma]: also encloses an understanding of rights that the state is supposed to protect and entitlements
[Amit Varma]: that it might have granted one. It implies duties that one might have, definitely civic
[Amit Varma]: and perhaps social and political as well. It presupposes a sense of identity and belonging.
[Amit Varma]: It's a term especially loaded with meaning in modern times, because being a citizen is
[Amit Varma]: different from being a subject. A handful of centuries ago, we were all subjects of
[Amit Varma]: some empire or fiefdom or the other. In 1947, when India gained political independence,
[Amit Varma]: we also gained the right for every Indian to turn from a subject to a citizen, empowered
[Amit Varma]: at an individual level to be masters of the state. Though I would argue that we still
[Amit Varma]: have the mentality of subjects. Citizenship is something that we all tend to take for
[Amit Varma]: granted. Although the events of the last weeks have forced many Indians to sit up and re-examine
[Amit Varma]: what the word means. What does it mean to be an Indian citizen? Although there are articles
[Amit Varma]: in the constitution and laws passed by Parliament on this subject, one basic truth remains.
[Amit Varma]: Our citizenship is what we make of it.
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Seen and the Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioural
[Amit Varma]: science. Please welcome your host, Amit Verma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Seen and the Unseen. Before we get started, a quick announcement. My partnership
[Amit Varma]: with the good folks at IVM podcast has ended and as of this week, starting with this episode,
[Amit Varma]: I will be producing The Seen and the Unseen myself. We did 151 episodes together and IVM
[Amit Varma]: was as much a labour of love for Amit Doshi and his team as The Seen and the Unseen has
[Amit Varma]: been for me, where the work has had to be its own reward because there hasn't been much
[Amit Varma]: else. Our parting was both inevitable and amicable and I wish IVM the very best. You
[Amit Varma]: can check out their collection of amazing Indian podcasts at ivmpodcast.com. Now on
[Amit Varma]: to this episode. We are recording this episode on December 20th and India has been on fire
[Amit Varma]: over the last few days over a new bill that the government has passed called the Citizenship
[Amit Varma]: Amendment Bill or the CAB. Taken in conjunction with the proposed National Register for Indian
[Amit Varma]: Citizens, this bill has certain implications that has many Indians worried, including me.
[Amit Varma]: The CAB and the NRC and the competing notions of citizenship that are now being argued in
[Amit Varma]: the public discourse all carry enormous historical baggage. We cannot understand these present
[Amit Varma]: times if we do not understand that history. To help unpack all of this, I have invited
[Amit Varma]: my friend, the historian Srinath Raghavan back on the show. Srinath had last appeared
[Amit Varma]: in The Seen and the Unseen to discuss the troubled history of Kashmir and Article 370
[Amit Varma]: and that episode turned out to be the most popular episode of The Seen and the Unseen
[Amit Varma]: so far. He's done three other fantastic episodes with me before that, all of which will be
[Amit Varma]: linked from the show notes at seenunseen.in. I'm glad he'll join me here again today. Srinath,
[Amit Varma]: welcome to the show. Good to be back on the new Seen and the Unseen. Yeah, Srinath, the
[Amit Varma]: last time you came here, it was on the back of a crisis about Article 370. And the time
[Amit Varma]: before that you came here, it could be argued that it presaged perhaps a future crisis with
[Amit Varma]: the India-Pakistan conflict where we, you know, after Balakot, we discussed the strategic
[Amit Varma]: implications of that. And we're in the middle of a bit of a crisis now also, aren't we?
[Guest]: Oh, yeah. And looks like this is a show for crisis and crisis management. Yeah. So you
[Amit Varma]: know, the thing is, a lot of people are asking, like when I was tweeting about this, a common
[Amit Varma]: question that people seem to have been programmed to ask almost, especially on day one, it almost
[Amit Varma]: seemed as if the IT cell had asked their anonymous handles to all, you know, comment asking protesters
[Amit Varma]: like us, what are the students protesting about, where the implication was that there's
[Amit Varma]: really nothing to protest. It's, you know, it's this bill has something to do with illegal
[Amit Varma]: migrants and all that. But the sort of historical implications of this are far greater if you
[Amit Varma]: look at the sort of larger picture. And one of the things that sort of struck me over
[Amit Varma]: the last three or four days is that, you know, when the bill was passed, I thought, okay,
[Amit Varma]: we are living in really dark times, things are getting worse very fast. But I have been
[Amit Varma]: enormously heartened by the protests that have been happening in the last three days.
[Amit Varma]: And I think in a sense, in a perverse way, the bill has had the opposite effect, whereas
[Amit Varma]: you would imagine it, you know, in conjunction with the NRC to take down the number of citizens
[Amit Varma]: in the country use, I think there are actually now suddenly many more citizens, so to say,
[Amit Varma]: you know, if we use a distinction between thin citizenship, which is, you know, the
[Amit Varma]: legal status and thick citizenship where you actually involved with your nation, and people
[Amit Varma]: are suddenly taking the citizenship very seriously.
[Guest]: Well, certainly, it seems to have catalyzed a largely unplanned spontaneous set of protest
[Guest]: movements across the country. And I think it's very interesting that this protest seems
[Guest]: to have a geographic reach, a sort of an institutional base in universities, not just of the old
[Guest]: public universities, but you know, in technological institutions and institutions of management,
[Guest]: in private universities, all of it suggests that there is a breadth and a depth to this
[Guest]: feeling of antipathy towards what is being imposed on the country by way of amendment
[Guest]: of the Citizenship Amendment Bill. And I think people have caught on to what is fundamentally
[Guest]: problematic about the bill itself, which is that it effectively discriminates against
[Guest]: the Muslims in India, and de jure reduces them to second class status in this country,
[Guest]: and that they feel is unjust, it's incorrect. And it goes against the fundamental tenets
[Guest]: of Indian identity, as they intuitively seem to understand was enshrined in the Constitution,
[Guest]: which I think is very heartening, because as you've been saying, you know, we have witnessed
[Guest]: a number of important pieces of legislation, other kinds of court verdicts happening this
[Guest]: year, right, you had the Article 370 of Kashmir being abolished, the state being divided into
[Guest]: two union territories, then you had the Supreme Court verdict on the Ram Jan Bhoomi Ayodhya
[Guest]: issue, where, you know, on the one hand, the destruction of the Babri Mosque was condemned,
[Guest]: but on the other hand, the people who destroyed it effectively have been given possession.
[Guest]: It was both condemned and condoned. Exactly, right. So in a sense, coming on the
[Guest]: back of these series of things which has happened, it is quite interesting that people have looked
[Guest]: upon this as a moment where some of their fundamental questions of status, rights and
[Guest]: identity, you know, the bundle of things that go into the making of the notion of citizenship,
[Guest]: as really being tested at this point of time. And it seems clear that they have decided
[Amit Varma]: that it's time to stand up. Right. And you know, one of the things which
[Amit Varma]: we're obviously going to do in this episode is talk about the historical background of
[Amit Varma]: all of this, both with the nature of citizenship, how it was in colonial India, the sort of
[Amit Varma]: battles in the Constituent Assembly at the time of independence to define it and set
[Amit Varma]: a direction forward and what it sort of revealed about the idea of India, the pluralistic idea
[Amit Varma]: of India that was then dominant among the framers of our constitution and problems of
[Amit Varma]: Assam and so on. So we look at the entire historical package. And we will also at the
[Amit Varma]: end cycle back to the present and talk about what's going on now and what the implications
[Amit Varma]: are. But before we do that, I want you to sum up for me, what are we protesting about
[Amit Varma]: exactly? You know, on the face of it, what many people seem to are saying on CAB and
[Amit Varma]: I get constantly on family WhatsApp groups, I get messages about it that what's the problem?
[Amit Varma]: This is only about refugees from other countries. It doesn't affect our citizenship. Why should
[Guest]: we be worried? Well, I think it we should be worried because the bill and the now the
[Guest]: act effectively is very clearly discriminatory. It creates explicitly stated discriminatory
[Guest]: provisions which leave out Muslims from getting citizenship as persecuted refugees from other
[Guest]: countries. It leaves out certain other countries are from the ambit of India's neighborhood.
[Guest]: For instance, it leaves out Tamils who have come from Sri Lanka, and who are still living
[Guest]: in refugee camps in Tamil Nadu, maybe for about 25-30 years now. So there is a range
[Guest]: of exclusions, all of which meditate against the guarantee of equality to all enshrined
[Guest]: in Article 14 of the Indian Constitution. And in that sense, this bill seems patently
[Guest]: unconstitutional. But more than anything else, it seems to strike a chord with people that
[Guest]: here is a piece of legislation, which is so blatantly discriminatory, which attempts to
[Guest]: reduce a very large number of people in this country to effectively a new category of citizenship.
[Guest]: And in that sense, you know, there have been parallels which have been evoked in a number
[Guest]: of fora with the Nuremberg laws of Germany, right? And it's it's worth recalling what
[Guest]: those Nuremberg laws were about. You know, the Nuremberg laws were one of the Nuremberg
[Guest]: laws effectively said that you could only be German if you're effectively of German
[Guest]: ancestry. And that German ancestry was defined as excluding the Jews. You know, people were
[Guest]: prohibited from getting married to Jews under the Nuremberg laws. So in a sense, it was
[Guest]: an attempt to preserve a certain majoritarian notion of German identity by consigning Jews
[Guest]: to second class citizenship. And that parallel, I think, has been evoked a number of times.
[Guest]: It may not be accurate in all its particulars, but I think it strikes a chord because it
[Guest]: is precisely that kind of a problem. And let's also face it that we have seen similar things
[Guest]: happening in our own neighborhood in more recent times, you only have to think about
[Guest]: the Rohingya problem, as it emerged in the context of Myanmar, and the grotesque tragedy
[Guest]: into which it has devolved. Even as we are speaking, you know, there's a trial going
[Guest]: on in the International Court of Justice, and none less than Aung San Suu Kyi has had
[Guest]: to show up in order to defend the country. So I think people are worried about what kind
[Guest]: of a path are we embarking on by bringing in this piece of legislation. Now, the CAA,
[Guest]: the amended act itself may seem exclusionary, innocuous, and so on. But it is effectively
[Guest]: a pincer movement when you combine it with the proposed National Register of Indian Citizens.
[Guest]: Now this National Register of Indian Citizens actually was proposed by the Vajpayee government
[Guest]: in 2003. Right? There's a citizenship rules of 2003, which promulgated the process through
[Guest]: which this was to be done. Subsequently, when the UPA government came in, they set that
[Guest]: aside and focused more on other projects like Aadhaar as a way of giving identity and, you
[Guest]: know, enabling people to claim their rights and so on. But what the current government
[Guest]: wants to do effectively is to first bring in the CAB, which then says that then we will
[Guest]: move on to the NRC exercise of enumerating who's an Indian citizen, which will have various
[Guest]: kinds of requirements. As the case of Assam has shown, there are a lot of people, both
[Guest]: Hindu and Muslim, who will be unable to produce the required documents in order to meet the
[Guest]: threshold. But the amended Citizenship Act will allow everyone but the Muslims to go
[Guest]: through a process for claiming citizenship and eventually reach the destination. Whereas
[Guest]: Muslims who may be unable to have the requisite documentation in order to be able to do that
[Guest]: will then be consigned into some kind of a legal limbo. On top of it, we now know from
[Guest]: newspaper reporting that instructions have been given to various state governments to
[Guest]: open internment camps in various areas. Right? We are speaking here in Mumbai and there is
[Guest]: a camp coming up in Nehru as the, you know, the newspapers reported this as well. Yeah,
[Guest]: the newspapers reported it some months ago. And what is going to be the status of people
[Guest]: who are there? What kind of rights will they have? What kind of freedoms will they be allowed
[Guest]: to? In fact, if you look at the detention centers, which have been on operation in Assam
[Guest]: for some years now, even normal jail manual provisions are not being followed in those
[Guest]: kinds of things. There is a report done by Harsh Mandir a few years ago after a visit
[Guest]: to these things, which is worth reading. So, I think if you put the new amended Citizenship
[Guest]: Act along with the proposed NRC, you are effectively attempting to consign a very large number
[Guest]: of people in this country to second class citizenship and possibly throw them into a
[Guest]: legal limbo. And I think that is something that all of us have to be worried about. I
[Guest]: would in fact go a little further and say that we have to look at this piece of legislation
[Guest]: in the framework of the broader sets of things which have been attempted by the government.
[Guest]: There was the criminalization of triple talaq. You know, triple talaq was a civil issue.
[Guest]: Already the Supreme Court had ruled that it was illegal, it would not have any validity.
[Guest]: But the government then goes on to bring a piece of legislation criminalizing a civil
[Guest]: matter, right, which then says that the Muslim man effectively is a deviant entity for whom
[Guest]: special criminal provisions need to be bought in which need not be bought in for other communities
[Guest]: and people of other religions. Then you had Article 370 being abolished. So, a constitutionally
[Guest]: guaranteed set of provisions for some degree of autonomy, which in practice were never
[Guest]: observed for the one Muslim majority state in this country was ostentatiously and unconstitutionally
[Guest]: without the concurrence of the state assembly done away with and that state has been divided
[Guest]: into two. And then, of course, as I said, you've had the Ayodhya verdict, all of which
[Guest]: put together suggests that, you know, a very large zone of exclusion in legal constitutional
[Guest]: terms is being created for Muslims in this country, or at least that is a fear. And it
[Guest]: is not just about Muslims, because any such exclusions from provisions of citizenship
[Guest]: of rights, which have been guaranteed by the constitution, apply equally to every one of
[Guest]: us. It is not just about them, but it is about us. And I think that is the feeling that the
[Guest]: people who are coming out in streets in such large numbers, in totally uncoordinated unplanned
[Guest]: ways to let out their feelings against what seems to be a patently discriminatory, unfair,
[Guest]: unjust regime, which is now being instituted.
[Amit Varma]: Absolutely. And I'll sort of state two responses to that. One is just to elaborate on what
[Amit Varma]: you said about the whole process of the natural register of Indian citizens coming about.
[Amit Varma]: One thing that people keep saying on Twitter and WhatsApp and so on, is that, hey, listen,
[Amit Varma]: why are you worried if you're an Indian citizen, just prove your citizenship, and that's fine.
[Amit Varma]: But how do you prove your citizenship? I mean, I don't at this moment in time know if even
[Amit Varma]: I have the papers, someone as privileged as me, to be able to prove my citizenship. And
[Amit Varma]: I want to quote from a piece that Sanjeev Barua wrote for Frontline, where he talks
[Amit Varma]: about you know, the difficulty in proving this, where he says, quote, the NRC exercise
[Amit Varma]: and he's talking about what happened last year in Assam, essentially, where this exercise
[Amit Varma]: actually took place. And he writes, quote, the NRC exercise exemplifies the fact that
[Amit Varma]: contrary to the talk of a paperless society, the growing use of electronic technologies
[Amit Varma]: has actually increased the need for paper documents and underline their importance in
[Amit Varma]: people's lives. Legacy data are at the heart of the process. To be included in the NRC,
[Amit Varma]: someone has to identify an ancestor whose name appears in either the NRC of 1951, or
[Amit Varma]: a pre 1971 electoral roll, and provides documentary evidence of linkage with that person, even
[Amit Varma]: with the substantial assistance available at the NRC Seva Kendras. This can be a challenge
[Amit Varma]: for many people. And he continues later, consider a person who lives in Assam, but was not born
[Amit Varma]: in the state. In order to process his or her legacy data, NRC officials have had to make
[Amit Varma]: as many as 600,000 requests for legacy verification to various state governments. The response
[Amit Varma]: from them has been poor and tardy. Some states responded to fewer than 1% of the requests.
[Amit Varma]: More than 100,000 requests for legacy verification were made to the West Bengal government. But
[Amit Varma]: the NRC authorities received responses only in 6.5% of the requests, stop quote. And you
[Amit Varma]: know, we've all seen newspaper stories about how even ex army officers like the other day
[Amit Varma]: I read about some ex army officer who fought in the Kargil war, now being in a detention
[Amit Varma]: camp because he doesn't have the papers to prove that he's a citizen. And the thing is,
[Amit Varma]: because like it is fortunate given bureaucracy that a lot of papers can just be got with
[Amit Varma]: such jugaad like ration cards and so on. But what this also means is that they are not
[Amit Varma]: accepted as evidence of citizenship. And therefore, it's just extremely difficult to prove your
[Amit Varma]: citizenship for literally anybody. And if and this brings me to the second observation,
[Amit Varma]: that if you are already of the mindset that you want to other a certain set of people,
[Amit Varma]: then this becomes a fantastic mechanism by which to do so. Well, you can say that, okay,
[Amit Varma]: you can't prove your citizenship. But if you're a Hindu, you know, under the CAB, we can still
[Amit Varma]: sort of grant your citizenship, but not Muslims because Muslims are specifically excluded
[Amit Varma]: from the CAB. Now, my sort of question here is like one observation, which I think you'll
[Amit Varma]: agree with is that one doubt that a lot of people had about how serious this dispensation
[Amit Varma]: is about a social agenda is now sort of laid to rest. They're very serious. I mean, I want
[Amit Varma]: to make three points. This is one. The second point is something that Akar Patel said on
[Amit Varma]: an episode with me a long time back when we discussed Hindutva, where he said that how
[Amit Varma]: do you define a Hindu Rashtra? And when it comes to like an Islamic state, or an Islamic
[Amit Varma]: nation, it's very easy. There are certain positive laws which apply to what, you know,
[Amit Varma]: good Muslims must do. But the notion of a Hindu Rashtra basically seems to rest on othering
[Amit Varma]: and on being anti Muslim. So if you look at all of like I also did an episode on the Gita
[Amit Varma]: Press with Akshay Mukul, where he spoke about this whole developing movement. And if you
[Amit Varma]: look at all these major tropes of the Hindutva movement, whether it's cow slaughter or love
[Amit Varma]: jihad, or, you know, since independence, a Hindu code bill, and therefore the UCC, they
[Amit Varma]: all come down to a sense of let's get at the Muslims. And my third point is that one might
[Amit Varma]: have thought that the kind of polarization that is now happening, and and the kind of
[Amit Varma]: effect that this kind of othering rhetoric has is something that the BJP might have been
[Amit Varma]: using for winning votes alone. But the point is, if that was the case, then so soon after
[Amit Varma]: an election, when they have an overwhelming majority, they would not have started rushing
[Amit Varma]: through all of these things, as you pointed out with the UCC, no doubt next, that they
[Amit Varma]: are doing this out of conviction, not out of a cynical vote grabbing exercise, which
[Guest]: is how do you react to all of this?
[Guest]: No, I think that's, that's broadly true. Because, you know, the conception one of the
[Guest]: core ideas of Hindutva, and this goes right back to Savarkar and his pamphlet, Hindutva,
[Guest]: you know, 1923, where he says that, you know, India is the homeland, the Pitrabhumi and
[Guest]: the Punyabhumi of all Hindus in the world, right. So it is akin to a certain conception
[Guest]: of say, like Israel being the homeland of all Jews in the world, right. So, and that
[Guest]: in effect is driving some of these things, right, which which goes back to the argument,
[Guest]: and we'll come to it a little bit more, because some of these arguments were also made in
[Guest]: the constituent assembly debates, when citizenship provisions were actually being discussed,
[Guest]: which is that, why should India not be the place where Hindus should naturally come to,
[Guest]: right, especially since Pakistan has been created for Muslims, you know, where are the
[Guest]: Hindus of the subcontinent going to go, you know, there is that kind of a rhetoric. But
[Guest]: as you said, that automatically gives a privileged position to Hindus in this country, which
[Guest]: goes against every tenet of the Indian constitution with its provisions for equality, the notion
[Guest]: of secularism, which is weaved into the constitution in so many different dimensions. And that
[Guest]: is a clearly an issue in play here, right. The second thing about, you know, why the
[Guest]: BJP is kind of doing this, at some level, I think, yes, it is definitely a question
[Guest]: of them saying, listen, we now have an electoral majority for the second successive time, we've
[Guest]: come back in much greater numbers, our program has been affirmed and validated. And we are
[Guest]: doing just what we promised in our manifesto, right. And the Home Minister, when he tabled
[Guest]: this bill, as well as Article 370, repealing, you know, the nullification of that those
[Guest]: provisions in Parliament said this, that this is there in our manifesto. But the reality
[Guest]: is that the manifesto of a party, even with 300 odd seats, is not the same thing as the
[Guest]: Constitution of India. And that is a fundamental distinction that I think it is incumbent upon
[Guest]: all of us to recognize, and for citizens to say that elected majority government is not
[Guest]: at liberty to overturn fundamental provisions of the Constitution, there have been sort
[Guest]: of constitutional doctrines of basic structure, etc, to that effect, which affirm this principle.
[Guest]: And I think this argument that listen, we have a majority, we won this election on the
[Guest]: basis of this manifesto. Hence, you know, we should be allowed to go ahead and do this
[Guest]: simply does not cut eyes. A constitutional democracy works on the principle that you
[Guest]: on the one hand have democracy, which is about aggregation of majority preferences. But on
[Guest]: the other hand, you also have the grid of constitutionalism imposed on it, which says
[Guest]: that there is an extent beyond which the majoritarian principle cannot operate. And I think we are
[Guest]: pretty much at the cusp of that kind of a moment.
[Amit Varma]: And it's sort of interesting, like one of the books you recommended I read was citizenship
[Amit Varma]: and its discontents by Neeraja Gopal Jial outstanding book. And she also gave a recent
[Amit Varma]: interview to the New Yorker, where she spoke about one of the things that is interesting
[Amit Varma]: about this whole majoritarian project in India, and which distinguishes it from other majoritarian
[Amit Varma]: projects is that the people we are projecting as the other are not recent immigrants, not
[Amit Varma]: recent migrants. It's like, you know, you might have, for example, movements in Europe
[Amit Varma]: against recent Muslim immigrants from Syria or wherever. And you might have movements
[Amit Varma]: in the US about relatively recent, like over the last century immigration from Latin America
[Amit Varma]: and so on. But what is happening in India is that Muslims have been a part of India
[Amit Varma]: for centuries, right? The other thing that is happening is a othering of people who are
[Amit Varma]: fundamentally part of the society. Ironically, a fact even Savarkar recognized, because if
[Amit Varma]: one sees his rhetoric till about 1910, it's actually very inclusive. And he sees Hindus
[Amit Varma]: and Muslims fighting together. And what really, you know, the two recent biographies on him
[Amit Varma]: elaborate upon is that the sort of brutal torture he was put through at Kalapani, even
[Amit Varma]: though the jailer was English, the people administrating the tortures were Muslims.
[Amit Varma]: And that seems to have awakened and radicalized him as far as Muslims were concerned. And
[Amit Varma]: therefore, in Hindutva, it's all about Muslims are the other and India belongs to the Hindus.
[Amit Varma]: The other fundamental clash of concepts here is that what Savarkar seems to be intimating
[Amit Varma]: is that citizenship is something that comes from descent. So if you are a Hindu, you are
[Amit Varma]: a citizen, whereas the other notion of citizenship is citizenship by birth. If you are born in
[Amit Varma]: India, you're a citizen. And the interesting thing is that the notion of citizenship by
[Amit Varma]: birth was dominant both in the British conception of citizenship from, you know, which was an
[Amit Varma]: intellectual influence on our leaders, and in the conception of citizenship by our freedom
[Amit Varma]: founders, including, you know, Motilal Nehru's document of 1928, and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: And but there has always been this sort of growing clash between these two, where constitutionally,
[Amit Varma]: we gave supreme status to citizenship by birth, therefore avoiding these sort of divisions
[Amit Varma]: that did not actually make sense for a multicultural and diverse society as ours. But you know,
[Amit Varma]: while that is in the constitution in the political notion of citizenship, citizenship by descent
[Amit Varma]: has kind of made a comeback.
[Guest]: Yes, you make a number of very important points. But before we start unpacking them, let me
[Guest]: also make a plug for Professor Neeraja Gopal Jayal's book, which I think is by a long chalk,
[Guest]: the best history that we have of citizenship, I would recommend to every listener of yours
[Guest]: to get a copy of the book and read it for themselves. I think it will clarify a lot
[Guest]: of things about our current...
[Guest]: It's a marvellous book, it will be linked from the show notes on SceneUnseen.in.
[Guest]: Thank you. Now, to go back to your question. Now, let's take Savarkar as a starting point,
[Guest]: for instance. Now, again, I don't want to get too much into the personal biography and,
[Guest]: you know, trajectory of Savarkar and why he kind of, you know, gets to this thing. But
[Guest]: at a very simple level, someone like Savarkar, you know, there is an irony that someone who
[Guest]: speaks so much about Indianness, about Hindutva Bhartiyata, as his descendants call it today,
[Guest]: are actually captive to the classic European notions of what should be a nation state.
[Guest]: Yeah, so in a sense, that's the irony of fundamental irony at the heart of the Hindutva project
[Guest]: that a project which apparently is about Indianness, authenticity, etc, is actually mimicking and
[Guest]: imitating and borrowing directly from a very straightforward 19th century European conception
[Guest]: of a nation state, which is defined by one ethnic category or race, as Savarkar himself
[Guest]: called it, defined by one language, which is unified in that sense, right? I mean, now,
[Guest]: that is the context in which someone like Savarkar says that, listen, if every state
[Guest]: has to be, every nation state has to be defined by one ethnos, then in the Indian context,
[Guest]: of course, the Hindus, right? And others, as long as they are able to accept that culturally
[Guest]: they are Hindu, you know, they can do what they want, that satisfies our requirement
[Guest]: of having constituted that kind of an ethnic national state, right? Which in turn leads
[Guest]: to this kind of conception of citizenship by descent, which you talked about, right?
[Guest]: Now, scholars of citizenship and political theorists broadly make a distinction between
[Guest]: two notions of citizenship, right? So, one is called use soli, use the Latin term J-U-S,
[Guest]: use soli and use sanguinis. Use soli refers to citizenship by birth, which is the place
[Guest]: where you're born decides whether you're a citizen or not. And use sanguinis is about
[Guest]: blood, kinship, and descent being the main principles through which you do, right? Now,
[Guest]: politically, we tend to think of Republican France as the sort of example of the first
[Guest]: conception of use soli based citizenship. You may also think of it as civic citizenship.
[Guest]: On the other hand, Germany is supposed to be the exemplar of use sanguinis, citizenship
[Guest]: by descent, and you can think of as ethnic citizenship, right? So, civic and ethnic,
[Guest]: use soli, use sanguinis. Now, in practice, of course, all these regimes tend to interpenetrate
[Guest]: to a greater or lesser extent in various kinds of regimes. Now, as far as India was concerned,
[Guest]: the reality for most Indians during the colonial period was that they had to cling to some
[Guest]: conception of citizenship to begin with, because you're subjects effectively of the British
[Guest]: Empire, right? So, all the debates about getting citizenship of the British Empire, etc, were
[Guest]: fundamentally had to reckon with the reality of your subjecthood of your being colonized
[Guest]: by an alien power, right? And in the context of the British Empire itself, there are at
[Guest]: least two levels at which discussions of citizenship used to happen. So, one was what you might
[Guest]: think of as imperial citizenship, rights of people who are dispersed across imperial territories.
[Guest]: And let us face it, the British Empire was also a great engine of migration, forced migrations,
[Guest]: indentured labor, slavery, plantations of various kinds, right? So, there are people
[Guest]: from India who are implanted in various parts of the British Empire, what rights did they
[Guest]: have? Someone like Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi actually came to the fore talking about the
[Guest]: rights of Indians in South Africa, who are working there, who had gone there and so on,
[Guest]: right? So, there is that kind of notion of what is, what rights do we have as citizens,
[Guest]: so to speak, of the British Empire? And then there is a question of what rights do you
[Guest]: have within the context of the British Raj in India itself, which is kind of more narrowly
[Guest]: defined, right? And much of the struggle was about this. And then the key sort of strand
[Guest]: of liberal thought in India from, say, the mid to late 19th century effectively attempted
[Guest]: to struggle for equality of citizenship, both within the British Empire, but also for grant
[Guest]: of citizenship rights within the context of British India itself, right? And that was
[Guest]: a project which was at the heart of this thing. And then one of the problems with the whole
[Guest]: liberal model of nationalism of the late 19th century variant was precisely that that was
[Guest]: never forthcoming on the part of the British. Even when they gave you certain rights, it
[Guest]: was always hedged in with qualifications of property, education, class status. So, in
[Guest]: that sense, right? And, and I'm always reminded of this, you know, wonderful book by Niro
[Guest]: Chaudhary, whom you can think of as a last exemplar of that great anglophone liberalism
[Guest]: of Bengal Renaissance, so to speak, right? The self-defined Renaissance. In his extraordinary
[Guest]: book published in 1951, soon after India's independence, called An Autobiography of an
[Guest]: Unknown Indian, Niro Chaudhary has a dedication to the book, which made the book totally notorious,
[Guest]: and in fact, made him an object of hate. But Nirodh Babu remained, you know, an anglophone
[Guest]: to the very end, he even migrated to England later on. And the dedication of the book says
[Guest]: this, right? It says the book is dedicated to the memory of the British Empire in India,
[Guest]: which conferred subjecthood upon us, but withheld citizenship, right? It's very interesting.
[Guest]: Conferred subjecthood, but withheld citizenship. And then he goes on to say, to which yet every
[Guest]: one of us throughout this challenge, and he says, quotes, civis Britannicus sum, which
[Guest]: is to say that I am a British, Britain. Yeah, that I am British. Civis Romanus sum was the
[Guest]: sort of phrase used by Kikeru to talk about rights of Romans everywhere, right? So, what
[Guest]: someone like Niro Chaudhary is trying to say is that we asked citizenship of the British
[Guest]: Empire, but it was withheld to us. But nevertheless, his admiration for that empire remains undimmed,
[Guest]: right? And if this is the sort of, you know, the kind of backward glance by one of the
[Guest]: last surviving members of what you may think of the classic Indian liberalism of the late
[Guest]: 19th century variant, you can see why the project failed, simply because you just could
[Guest]: not get it on those terms from the British Empire. And of course, you know, there are
[Guest]: discussions about what should constitute citizenship in independent India. And there you mentioned
[Guest]: about the Motilal Nehru report of 1928, which is an interesting document because it is something
[Guest]: like a proto constitution for an independent India or an attempt at, you know, devising
[Guest]: some kind of constitution for independent India. And the Motilal Nehru report already
[Guest]: enshrines use solely or citizenship by birth as the principle of granting citizenship in
[Guest]: independent India, right? And it says that anyone born or naturalized within the territorial
[Guest]: limits of India, or who's the child of a father born or naturalized in the territorial limits
[Guest]: of India would be given Indian citizenship. Now, please note, if your father was born,
[Guest]: you could be right. So, it's still a restricted form of citizenship. There is a gendered quality
[Guest]: to that notion of citizenship, which is enshrined in the 1928 Motilal Nehru report. But nevertheless,
[Guest]: the fundamental principle is of citizenship by birth. It is of a civic form of citizenship
[Guest]: rather than an ethnic form of citizenship. And that is what then comes to the fore in
[Guest]: the debates in the Constituent Assembly, when which are happening against the backdrop of
[Guest]: partition itself.
[Amit Varma]: So, we'll come to that later, just to sort of, you know, get back to the sort of the
[Amit Varma]: strivings within India for citizenship of the British Empire. You know, it kind of strikes
[Amit Varma]: me that, you know, when you look back in the late 19th century, you have these very fine
[Amit Varma]: liberals like Naoroji, Gokhale, Ranadey Agarkar and so on, whom we now collectively call as
[Amit Varma]: moderates because they were moderate in their method, so to say. And in fact, I had an episode
[Amit Varma]: on Indian conservatism with Jerry Rao, where he claimed that they were conservatives, because
[Amit Varma]: their methods were not radical. And it's sort of interesting to put yourself in their shoes,
[Amit Varma]: where India doesn't exist. You know, today, we sort of look at the past through a frame
[Amit Varma]: of the present and all the things we take for granted that there is this, you know,
[Amit Varma]: there is a state of India, which we are part of, and we are all patriots, and we love the
[Amit Varma]: country and whatever, and we are proud citizens of India. So why would you want to be a second
[Amit Varma]: class citizen somewhere else? But there you have all of these very fine liberals, Naoroji
[Amit Varma]: in words, who are basically part of the British Empire, the conception of India is something
[Amit Varma]: that is still nebulous and hasn't really solidified and taken shape. And within those restraints,
[Amit Varma]: they are essentially trying for, you know, and even the term citizenship isn't so defined.
[Amit Varma]: If you just look at the landscape of the 19th century, you know, that there aren't so many
[Amit Varma]: like women don't vote, you know, you still don't have universal suffrage. And the conception
[Amit Varma]: of a citizen is very different from what it should be now. And I'm sort of struck by,
[Amit Varma]: you know, how one can look back at all of them and find them ineffectual and say, right,
[Amit Varma]: hey, what were they asking for? What were their methods, you know, with the benefit
[Amit Varma]: of hindsight, but it's still an interesting battle to take Indians forward. And there's
[Amit Varma]: a very interesting quote here by Lala Lajpat Rai, which I got from Nirja's book, of course,
[Amit Varma]: where he talks about the increasing group of elite Indians in the early 20th century
[Amit Varma]: who are asking for more rights or more like quasi citizenships, where he says, quote,
[Amit Varma]: the fact is that the British government in India is on the horns of a dilemma. They want
[Amit Varma]: the Indians to believe that they are the equal subjects of the king. But when the former
[Amit Varma]: claim their rights as such, they behave as if they have neither the power nor the desire
[Amit Varma]: to secure the same for them. Perhaps it is not so much the fault of the government of
[Amit Varma]: India as those statesmen who have to reconcile their professions and principles of liberalism
[Amit Varma]: with their policy of subjection. And then he goes on to say, the desire, the ambition
[Amit Varma]: and the necessity of claiming the rights of British citizenship is no longer confined
[Amit Varma]: to educated Indians, but is permeating through the uneducated classes and even the masses,
[Amit Varma]: stop quote. And of course, he uses the phrase British citizenship here and a lot of the
[Amit Varma]: sort of quote unquote, citizenship and the rights or entitlements that are given to Indians
[Amit Varma]: at that time are on the basis of property and education confined to a very small number
[Amit Varma]: of people. How does the conception of citizenship within India grow from this, from just a few
[Amit Varma]: people with property and education having any rights at all, to something all encompassing
[Guest]: as it did when we gained independence? Well, I think there are two aspects to it,
[Guest]: which are worth recalling. First, as far as the, the older, you know, discourse about
[Guest]: citizenship in the context of British Empire is concerned, I think the point of reference
[Guest]: for that, especially from the turn of the 20th century really is about the fact that
[Guest]: there are certain parts of the British Empire, which are given various forms of recognition
[Guest]: in terms of their autonomy, their rights, which are known as the white dominions, which
[Guest]: are Canada, Australia, South Africa, right? And these areas are recognized and there is
[Guest]: a very clear racial divide within the British Empire itself, which is running through, right?
[Guest]: You know, the, the great African American thinker W.E.B. Du Bois, you know, talked about
[Guest]: the color line girdling the globe, right? And it definitely girdled the British Empire.
[Guest]: And there was that racial divide, which said that, you know, certain dominions and certain
[Guest]: colonies had greater rights within the British Empire could aspire to various forms of citizenship,
[Guest]: because they were officially even known as the white dominions.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, even among the white people, there were divisions in the sense that, like
[Amit Varma]: one fascinating fact I read was that if you were a French person naturalized in New Zealand,
[Amit Varma]: you'd be a British citizen as long as you were within the dominion of New Zealand. But
[Amit Varma]: if you went back to England, you would be considered a Frenchman and a foreigner.
[Guest]: That's right. The second thing which was done was that the white dominions were given power
[Guest]: to regulate immigration to their territories. You know, Lala Rajpathrai's observations here,
[Guest]: as well as many of his other writings from that period, also have to be understood against
[Guest]: the backdrop of the infamous Komagata Maru incident, right, which in some ways crystallized
[Guest]: many of these problems, which is that when a ship bearing a number of Indians attempts
[Guest]: to berth in Canada, it is turned away. Right. And so, in a sense, the white dominions were
[Guest]: allowed to restrict people from other parts of the British Empire from entering their
[Guest]: own territory, right, which suggested that you had a distinct second class status, even
[Guest]: within the British Empire. And that was primarily a racial sort of divide, which was there,
[Guest]: even though it was not termed in so many ways, and but it was absolutely evident to all the
[Guest]: people that you named, that this was the game in play. And that is what they were trying
[Guest]: to rise against. And as I said, even Gandhi was trying to do similar things in the context
[Guest]: of South Africa.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. And Gandhi, of course, moved from a position of working with the empire to eventually
[Amit Varma]: rebelling against the empire and working with the empire wasn't working out. Just to sort
[Amit Varma]: of briefly tell my listeners what Komagata Maru was, there was a ship called Komagata
[Amit Varma]: Maru, which took a bunch of Indians, I think around 200 to Canada, and the Canadian government
[Amit Varma]: refused them entry, it I think just took one Indian doctor, four people and 20 people who
[Amit Varma]: were Canadians coming back to Canada. But the remaining Indians were sent back on the
[Amit Varma]: ship. And when the ship embarked on what was then Bombay, the British government refused
[Amit Varma]: to let them disembark because they said that, you know, you guys committed sedition by leaving
[Amit Varma]: us and going to Canada. And there were clashes and I think 19 people or something like that
[Amit Varma]: actually died in those clashes. That's kind of where we are now we get to independence,
[Amit Varma]: okay, and you have the and as Gopal points out in her book, quote, at midnight on August
[Amit Varma]: 15 1947, all the erstwhile Indian subjects of King George VI did not, as we might expect,
[Amit Varma]: automatically become citizens of the new nation. Stop quote, you know, there is still a process
[Amit Varma]: left the country is independent, but the people are not citizens, there is still a process
[Amit Varma]: left that process is being debated in the Constituent Assembly. Guidelines are being
[Amit Varma]: discussed by the framers of the Constitution and how we should look at citizenship. Tell
[Amit Varma]: me a bit about that period and what are the fault lines in those debates?
[Guest]: Well, I think the starting point is to recognize what historians of partition have been telling
[Guest]: us for some time now, which is that partition was not an event, it was actually a process.
[Guest]: It did not just happen at the stroke of midnight. It was something whose practicalities both
[Guest]: India and Pakistan had to grapple with for several years, perhaps even decades into the
[Guest]: future about the kinds of, you know, actual realistic administrative and various kinds
[Guest]: of legal measures that had to be put in place. And that, of course, goes to the heart of
[Guest]: the problem, which is about the movement of, you know, maybe 10 plus million people across
[Guest]: the borders of the newly created states of India and Pakistan. And again, it was not
[Guest]: something just concentrated in time, but was spread out. And how do we deal with this,
[Guest]: right? So it is in that context that really the Constituent Assembly has to consider the
[Guest]: citizenship sort of provisions, right? And it is recognized that once the Constitution
[Guest]: comes into play, and there is a government, the parliament will legislate and create a
[Guest]: citizenship act. But in the meantime, the Constituent Assembly, which is also doubling
[Guest]: up as the legislature, had to take certain kinds of put certain kinds of principles both
[Guest]: to guide future legislation, but also to cater for some immediate problems of what is happening.
[Guest]: So those debates are an interesting mixture. And they're fascinating precisely because,
[Guest]: you know, they are discussing principles, even while the tragedy of partition is unfolding.
[Guest]: So you have you cannot leave the practicalities of it aside. You cannot leave the emotions
[Guest]: that are in play aside, right? So it's a very, very interesting thing. And in the last set
[Guest]: of discussions on the citizenship provisions of the Constitution, Jawaharlal Nehru actually
[Guest]: says that, you know, this is perhaps the one part of the Constitution that we have discussed
[Guest]: the longest, right? Because it was very contentious. Because it mixed both issues of principle,
[Guest]: issues of practical importance, issues of imminent practical importance, right? So that
[Guest]: is the thing. Now, there are broadly three provisions of the Constitution, which were,
[Guest]: you know, dealing with these questions, Articles 5, 6, and 7. So let me just quickly summarize
[Guest]: them. I don't want to get too much into detail, and then talk a little bit about how those
[Guest]: debates themselves played out, right? So Article 5 effectively says that at the time of the
[Guest]: commencement of this Constitution, 26 January 1950, as it turned out, anyone who's born
[Guest]: in India, or either of whose parents are born in India, right, please note, we've improved
[Guest]: from the Motilal Nehru report of 1928. So either of whose parents are born in India,
[Guest]: or who has been resident in India for five years continuously, will be a citizen of India,
[Guest]: right? So that is the main provision of Article 5. Article 6 talks about provisions for those
[Guest]: who migrated to India from Pakistan. And it says that if this person, her parents, or
[Guest]: grandparents were born in undivided India, which is British India, and they talked about
[Guest]: the Government of India Act 1935 defining those boundaries. And if that person migrated
[Guest]: before July 1948, when the sort of the migration controls were brought into place, and were
[Guest]: residents since then, or if they came between July 1948, and the time that the Constitution
[Guest]: comes into force, then they would be registered as citizens, right? So you have a provision
[Guest]: for people who are coming in from Pakistan to India. And even though no religions are
[Guest]: named, it is understood that a majority of those people are going to be Hindus and Sikhs,
[Guest]: right? That that is the demographic of that particular movement. Now, Article 7, which
[Guest]: in some ways, is important, because it superseded some the, you know, Articles 5 and 6, it says
[Guest]: that anyone who migrates from India to Pakistan, after March 1 of March 1947, right, which
[Guest]: is even before partition happens, shall not be deemed a citizen of India, right? This
[Guest]: is a very strong provision, which is brought in to say that anyone who left India on or
[Guest]: after first March 1947, will not be seen as a citizen of India, even if they want to come
[Guest]: back to India, right? And if they return to India, they will have to return with a permit,
[Guest]: which is issued by the Indian High Commission in Pakistan. And then there would be a path
[Guest]: for citizenship to them, which is that they will be seen as people who are effectively
[Guest]: coming after July 1948, as per the provisions of Article 6, right? So, in a sense, you say,
[Guest]: first of all, that anyone who left India for Pakistan, which is effectively Muslims, after
[Guest]: March 1947, shall not be regarded as citizens. And that if they want to come back, as a lot
[Guest]: of people were coming back, because their family is their property, etc, might have
[Guest]: been in India, then they would have to get this special permit and have to get into this
[Guest]: track for coming into citizenship, right? So, between these three things, Article 5,
[Guest]: which is overall provisions, 6, which is about people coming into India, 7, which is about
[Guest]: people going from India to Pakistan who might want to come back, right? These three provisions
[Guest]: together were at the heart of the Constituent Assembly's discussions on citizenship itself.
[Guest]: And these were very contentious provisions, right? I mean, let me just sort of give you
[Guest]: an example of the kinds of arguments which are made. I mean, there are very fascinating
[Guest]: discussions, you know, the one of the great things is that the Constituent Assembly debates
[Guest]: are now very easily accessible online. So, I'd encourage, you know, viewers to go back
[Guest]: and read this because it gives you a sense of how, you know, thoughtful but at the same
[Guest]: time impassioned those discussions were and in some ways, you know, a refreshing contrast
[Amit Varma]: to what happens in our discussions. In fact, a sign of how impassioned they were
[Amit Varma]: is that, you know, Jaspath Roy Kapoor called Article 7 the obnoxious clause. And a lot
[Amit Varma]: of the literature refers to it as obnoxious clause, quote unquote, because you know, that's
[Guest]: how strongly they felt. Yeah, yeah. So, let me just, you know, and
[Guest]: then just worth pointing out that Jaspath Roy was a senior congressman from UP. And
[Guest]: many of the people who criticized these provisions, or, you know, said that, listen, why use Soli
[Guest]: based principle, or why should, you know, people coming back from Pakistan be given
[Guest]: an opportunity even to become citizens at all, when they've actually first left for
[Guest]: Pakistan, right, were not necessarily people who are from the Hindu right, so to speak,
[Guest]: they were from the Congress Party as well, because there was a lot of feeling at that
[Guest]: point of time, that the country had been divided. Right. And it kind of goes back to some of
[Guest]: the arguments which were made by the Home Minister when he was tabling, right, in the
[Guest]: discussion, he sort of at one point burst out saying, it is a Congress Party which divided
[Guest]: the country on the basis of religion, you know, actually, the Congress Party accepted
[Guest]: partition, but they never accepted the two nation theory, right. And even if you look
[Guest]: at the partition plan of 1947, which was unveiled, it is very clear that the Congress Party does
[Guest]: not at any point say that we accept the division of India on the basis of the two nation theory,
[Guest]: what the Congress Party signs up to effectively is this. The partition plan says that the
[Guest]: legislatures of the state provinces of Punjab and Bengal will vote on whether the provinces
[Guest]: should stay united or should be separated. The legislature of Sindh will vote on whether
[Guest]: it should go to India or Pakistan. There would be a referendum in the Northwest frontier
[Guest]: province, because even though it is a Muslim majority province and contiguous to Punjab,
[Guest]: Dhaka and Sindh was ruled by a Congress government in the select district of Assam, which we
[Guest]: will come to again later, you know, there was be a referendum, right. So, effectively,
[Guest]: what the Congress Party signed up to was to say that if democratic tests could be used
[Guest]: to establish that a significant minority of the country wanted to secede, and if it was
[Guest]: geographically possible, then we will not stand in the way of such a session, right.
[Guest]: That was what the Congress Party signed up to. They never accepted that the two nation
[Guest]: theory was the principle on which we are accepting the partition. Yeah. So, they accepted partition,
[Guest]: but never the two nation theory. So, in that sense, the Honorable Home Minister was totally
[Guest]: wrong when he said that in the floor of the house. But these points were, however, you
[Guest]: know, reflected the debates on the CAD, right. So, for instance, there is Bhargav Das, you
[Guest]: know, who says that he I have only two wishes as far as the citizenship law is concerned,
[Guest]: that every person who comes from Pakistan as a refugee should have no problem becoming
[Guest]: a citizen in India. But whoever left for Pakistan in order to become a citizen of Pakistan before
[Guest]: independence should never get citizenship in India, right. So, there's a sense that
[Guest]: isn't those who have left, why should they ever be given the opportunity to come back,
[Guest]: right? Even before Jaspath Roy talked about the obnoxious clause, etc, you know, there's
[Guest]: another very interesting person called Dr. P S Deshmukh, who later became the Union Agriculture
[Guest]: Minister in 1952, senior Congress leader, who said that, you know, forget about Article
[Guest]: 7. In fact, I think Article 5 itself, which defines a basic, you know, you solely principle,
[Guest]: he says should be changed to state that every person who's a Hindu or a Sikh, and is not
[Guest]: the citizen of any other state should automatically be eligible for the citizenship of India,
[Guest]: right? So, he wanted to bring use sanguineous or dissent into the story, because the argument
[Guest]: which he makes, and he says this in the Constituent Assembly, he says, if the Muslims want an
[Guest]: exclusive place for themselves called Pakistan, why should not Hindus and Sikhs have India
[Guest]: as their home? Yeah, that is the classic use sanguineous argument. The interesting thing
[Guest]: is that even as Dr. Deshmukh is saying these things, he says that I know this will militate
[Guest]: against our conception of India as a secular state. He says that also in the Constituent
[Guest]: Assembly debates, right? So, there is a recognition that the use sanguineous principle will cut
[Guest]: against the broader vision of the thing. But there is a sense of anger that the country
[Guest]: has been partitioned, and those who left should simply not have the option ever to come back,
[Amit Varma]: right? In fact, there's a reflection of that anger and the same thing you're saying and
[Amit Varma]: what Jaspath Roy himself said, where, you know, talking about Article 7, the obnoxious
[Amit Varma]: clause, he says, quote, it's a serious matter of principle. Once a person has migrated to
[Amit Varma]: Pakistan and transferred his loyalty from India to Pakistan, his migration is complete,
[Amit Varma]: he has definitely made up his mind at that time to kick this country and let it go to
[Amit Varma]: its own fate. And he went away to the newly created Pakistan where he would put in his
[Amit Varma]: best efforts to make it a free, progressive and prosperous state, stop quote, where the
[Amit Varma]: implication is, and this is also a kind of other implication is that listen, you left
[Amit Varma]: and therefore you're a traitor. And now you can't come back. And, you know, we can think
[Amit Varma]: of it in harder terms right now. But at that point in time, everything is very fluid, people
[Amit Varma]: are going back and forth. And that date is something arbitrary, which many citizens don't
[Amit Varma]: even realize that there is a date like that. Or, you know, I mean, I read about a guy who
[Amit Varma]: went on a business trip to Pakistan before the date and came back after the date. And
[Guest]: he was stuck in a case for years because
[Guest]: Yeah, and that that precisely was the kind of divide in the Constituent Assembly, right?
[Guest]: So those who wanted to tighten the provisions of Article 7 by saying, listen, there should
[Guest]: just be no avenue for those who left for Pakistan to come back to India, effectively arguing
[Guest]: that this was purely a matter of voluntary choice, right? As he says, he has kicked this
[Guest]: country, he has gone, he has made his choice. Why the hell should such people be allowed
[Guest]: ever to come back, right? And if they come back, they will be fifth columnists in this
[Guest]: country and so on. And again, what is striking about not just these debates, but many other
[Guest]: debates in the Constituent Assembly is this language of saying, you know, people have
[Guest]: to be loyal to the country and so on. Even Jawaharlal Nehru says it, though to Jawaharlal
[Guest]: Nehru's credit, he says that Pakistanis should be loyal to Pakistan, Indians should be loyal
[Guest]: to India, right? But there is the sense that how are we going to create this national unity
[Guest]: and so on, which is an underlying sense of many of these kinds of choices.
[Amit Varma]: So, isn't then the case, the fault line state exists today in the discourse, which have
[Amit Varma]: led to these protests, which has led to the CAA, were also present then. It's just that
[Amit Varma]: the people who sort of, you know, like even those who are arguing that, you know, that
[Amit Varma]: India should be the home for all Hindus and whatever and just as Pakistan is a home for
[Amit Varma]: Muslims is in a sense, arguing a version of the two nation theory. So, did the fault lines
[Amit Varma]: also then exist then except that then they were on the losing side and the broader secular
[Amit Varma]: inclusive vision won out, and now they're not on the losing side anymore?
[Guest]: Well, I think that is the important thing to remember, that it was not at all inevitable
[Guest]: that the secular broader vision, pluralistic vision should have won out in the Constituent
[Guest]: Assembly, right? Which is why I was trying to emphasize that the people who are making
[Guest]: these points are senior congressmen. They are not people from the Hindu Mahasabha who
[Amit Varma]: are a small minority whom you can just relegate.
[Amit Varma]: Exactly. So, it's a dominant stream of thinking.
[Guest]: There is a very important stream and that is why these were the most contentious provisions
[Guest]: as Jawaharlal Nehru observed, right? But the point is that how were they able to persuade
[Guest]: and win over this thing, right? First by affirming that, listen, we are for a secular state and
[Guest]: that the principle of citizenship by birth is the one that best captures this. Yes, we
[Guest]: recognize that those who left Pakistan, you know, they should not have an, you know, Indian
[Guest]: citizenship should not be so cheap that people can just come back and ask for it. But at
[Guest]: the same time, we cannot tell them that, listen, you cannot come back. And the argument which
[Guest]: was made was to say that this is not always a matter of choice, that a lot of people left
[Guest]: under compulsion, under duress. When you have communal violence of that kind erupting, a
[Guest]: lot of people thought it might be safer to move to areas where there are Muslim majorities
[Guest]: and vice versa, right? It is in that context that a lot of people left. When things settle
[Guest]: down, people want to come back to their home and hearth. You know, there is also an underlying
[Guest]: economic dimension to the story. A lot of the people who opposed the provisions of Article
[Guest]: 7 said that, you know, Muslims should never be allowed to come back from Pakistan to India
[Guest]: and claim citizenship. We're also concerned that those who are coming back will also claim
[Guest]: property. The property they left behind, basically. Yeah, which has been taken over by the Evacuee
[Guest]: Property Organization, right? I mean, and they said that, listen, if they claim back
[Guest]: property, how are we going to resettle refugees who come to India, right? And Jawaharlal Nehru
[Guest]: and the Congress Party, Patel and others made it very clear, saying that, listen, it is
[Guest]: the responsibility of an Indian state to rehabilitate those people. It is not the owners should
[Guest]: not be left upon people, communities and the property which, you know, they have at their
[Guest]: disposal. The second thing which they said very clearly and Nehru says this in his sort
[Guest]: of important intervention in these debates is that to argue against Article 7 is to argue
[Guest]: for discrimination, is to argue for unfairness. It is exactly the language that the protesters
[Guest]: of today are using to say that if you want to exclude some people from provisions of
[Guest]: citizenship, yeah, it's not to say that everybody has a freedom, right? It's not like what the
[Guest]: Prime Minister said, or should every Pakistani be eligible for Indian citizenship? That's
[Guest]: an absurd claim. The issue is that do we put in place laws, which will systematically exclude
[Guest]: some people from claiming citizenship in that context. And it was a very hard won victory.
[Guest]: It was not an easy thing for even the Congress Party to carry the Constituent Assembly and
[Guest]: for these provisions to come into play, which is why I think it is all the more important
[Guest]: that people should actually go back and read those debates to understand that the Congress
[Guest]: Party and the Indian nationalists of the time, not just the Congress Party, the mood in the
[Guest]: Constituent Assembly was never to accept the two nation theory. There was a lot of, you
[Guest]: know, heat around these debates around the anger of the fact that the country had been
[Guest]: divided. But at the same time, that anger was not allowed to subsume fundamental principles
[Guest]: of equity, pluralism and secularism on the basis of which the Constitution was being
[Amit Varma]: drawn.
[Amit Varma]: And as an aside, you know, there is a semantic reflection of the tenor of those debates and
[Amit Varma]: which might even have relevance to what is going on today, in the sense that even though
[Amit Varma]: these words did not make it to the actual articles, two of the words used a lot in the
[Amit Varma]: debates were refugee and migrant. Whereas refugee, it was sort of used in a sense of
[Amit Varma]: Hindus, you know, fleeing Pakistan and East Pakistan as it were, and therefore poor guys,
[Amit Varma]: they have no choice, they've been forced out. So you know, we will welcome them. But with
[Amit Varma]: migrants, it was a reference to the people, article seven dealt with that Muslims who
[Amit Varma]: might have gone to Pakistan or been there on that date, and then they decide to come
[Amit Varma]: here, you know, and, but you know, spoken of as migrants, not refugees, because, you
[Amit Varma]: know, there's a choice involved, and what is the intent, and we must ascertain the intent.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, you have then commission sitting in over the intent and not listening to what
[Amit Varma]: the stated intent is, but, you know, rejecting a lot of Muslim applications for citizenship
[Amit Varma]: on that basis. And so, you know, it does seem to me that sort of, okay, you know, the secular
[Amit Varma]: liberal way of thinking sort of won the argument back then. But I think the argument that a
[Amit Varma]: lot of people are sort of making now, is that a permanent victory? Why should that still
[Amit Varma]: be the case? And that is, of course, something I lament, because I think both you and I are
[Amit Varma]: of the persuasion that we should not discriminate. And, you know, we value secularism, but the
[Amit Varma]: point and I think I brought this up in my in our episode on Kashmir as well, the point
[Amit Varma]: that Dindayal Upadhyay made about the constitution were not in so many words, but the idea being
[Amit Varma]: that look, it was a constitution imposed by a liberal elite on a country which did not
[Amit Varma]: share those values. So, you know, it's one thing to say, like you said, at the start
[Amit Varma]: of the episode, that just because they have won an election doesn't mean that they can
[Amit Varma]: overturn the constitution. But their argument would be that look, the constitution number
[Amit Varma]: one is not a permanent thing. Number two, the constitution has been desecrated constantly
[Amit Varma]: through the decades by Nehru and Indira Gandhi repeatedly. They themselves desecrated the
[Amit Varma]: constitution to the extent that as early as 1953, Ambedkar said that, you know, if I could,
[Amit Varma]: I would burn the constitution, you know, a document that he authored, he felt so strongly
[Amit Varma]: about what was being done to it. So, the argument of the people today would be that look, look
[Amit Varma]: at what Nehru and Indira did to the constitution to the extent that, for example, the preamble
[Amit Varma]: that people are reading out in all these protest marches is basically not the Ambedkar preamble,
[Amit Varma]: it's the Indira preamble. And they would argue that, no, now, you know, we are the people,
[Amit Varma]: we have proven that in the electoral system that we have, why does that have less significance
[Amit Varma]: than the constitution? That is a question that could be posed, not something that I
[Amit Varma]: am posing or I agree with. But that's one way of looking at it.
[Guest]: No, the constitution was never intended to be a dead document. It was supposed to be
[Guest]: a living document, right? Which is why the provisions for amendment were made and fairly
[Guest]: liberal provisions for amendment, right? And if you, the threshold for amendment is not
[Guest]: that high for many parts of the Indian constitution, which is why the Indian constitution is not
[Guest]: just one of the longest documents of its kind in the world, but it's possibly one of the
[Guest]: most amended such documents as well. So, there is no, you know, point in saying that, listen,
[Guest]: this thing and in fact, the first set of amendments were bought in by Jawaharlal Nehru.
[Amit Varma]: Exactly. I mean, we know that back history. In fact, there's an old cartoon about how
[Guest]: the constitution is not a book, but a periodical. Yeah. And in fact, Nehru himself says in one
[Guest]: of his letters saying that, you know, the biggest problem with this constitution is
[Guest]: that, you know, we try to plug everything into it and it constantly keeps coming in
[Guest]: the way of what we are trying to do in any context. So, that is, I think it is taken.
[Guest]: But the issue is whether a set of laws made by a parliament, which is elected on democratic
[Guest]: principles can effectively overturn the fundamental underlying principles of the constitution.
[Guest]: And there, there is a doctrine which goes back to the famous Kesavananda Bharati judgment
[Guest]: of the 1970s, which talks about there being a basic structure to the Indian constitution
[Guest]: and that no legislation which undermines that basic structure will be deemed as consonant
[Guest]: with the constitution. It has been affirmed many times that the provisions of equality
[Guest]: of secularism are basic structures, features of the Indian constitution in as much as the
[Guest]: current amendment to the Citizenship Act undercuts and goes against those principles, it is to
[Guest]: my mind unconstitutional. I'm not a constitutional lawyer. We can discuss these things. I'm sure
[Guest]: the courts will hear it at some point. But the reality is that that is what the argument
[Guest]: is about. The argument is not to say that, listen, the constitution is frozen in time
[Amit Varma]: or that it's a document which cannot be changed. But, you know, here's the point. So, and I'll
[Amit Varma]: link to a talk that my friend Shruti Rajgopalan gave on YouTube about this, about the constitution
[Amit Varma]: changing over the years, is that every time Nehru did something unconstitutional or Indira
[Amit Varma]: Gandhi did something unconstitutional, and this happened many times, and it was ruled
[Amit Varma]: to be unconstitutional, they changed the constitution. So, my hypothetical question to you, therefore,
[Amit Varma]: is that if this lot, which almost has the numbers to change the constitution and might
[Amit Varma]: well, God forbid, have those numbers at some point, if they change the constitution, then
[Amit Varma]: are we to sit back and say, oh, okay, this is a constitution. Now it's no longer unconstitutional.
[Guest]: No, but that is precisely what the Keshavananda Bharati judgment and the basic structure doctrine
[Guest]: prevents you from doing, which is to say that there are limits to what the parliament can
[Guest]: do by way of amending the constitution. There are some aspects of the constitution that
[Guest]: you cannot tamper with, right. So, there is no straightforward constitutionally correct
[Guest]: option to wholesale overturn the fundamental nature of the constitution itself. If you
[Guest]: want to do it properly, then effectively, you should ask people, campaign on the basis
[Guest]: of saying, listen, we are going to have a second constituent assembly, please put that
[Guest]: on the manifesto, go to the people. If you win a victory, then perhaps you can convene
[Guest]: a second constitutional assembly and design the constitution that you want, and then go
[Guest]: back to the people and get it approved with them in a referendum.
[Amit Varma]: Who knows, they might actually do this, and then you will be back here and we'll be discussing
[Guest]: another process. I am happy to sort of, you know, contemplate
[Guest]: a possibility like that, in a sense, I think, but that is the only way to change the constitution.
[Guest]: Every other way of doing this stuff by stealth, you know, as it was done in the context of
[Guest]: the 370, you know, by sort of an indirect skullduggery type action, cannot stand scrutiny
[Guest]: if the courts take a proper view of what is happening. I am not a constitutional lawyer,
[Guest]: but this much I know that if you want a fundamentally different constitution, then you need a second
[Guest]: constituent assembly of some kind. You need a different constitutional regime in order
[Guest]: to bring in a new constitution. You cannot just marginally keep tinkering and getting
[Guest]: to that point. Now, we may well get to that point if the
[Guest]: courts do not stand up for the constitution, which they are there to interpret and protect.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, an irony that strikes me here, and this is an aside before we sort of get
[Amit Varma]: back to the main body of our discussion. An irony that strikes me here is that many supporters
[Amit Varma]: of this government sort of identify as conservatives and they call themselves conservative, but
[Amit Varma]: it kind of strikes me that what this particular government is doing, and I mean this in an
[Amit Varma]: entirely negative sense, what this government is doing is not conservative at all, is both
[Amit Varma]: revolutionary and radical. They are one, not only going against the grain of the constitution
[Amit Varma]: itself, as you pointed out, which is an extremely radical act, but you could argue that they
[Amit Varma]: are also going against the grain of Indian society, which by its nature is assimilative
[Amit Varma]: and tolerant. And this is sort of a debate that I wrestle with in my own mind. You know,
[Amit Varma]: I brought it up in my recent episode with JP Narayan, where he objected to my classification
[Amit Varma]: of India as an illiberal society. And you know, one can obviously point out many illiberal
[Amit Varma]: things about our society, especially the misogyny and the way women are treated, for example.
[Amit Varma]: But equally, in one way, we are a liberal society in the sense that we assimilate influences
[Amit Varma]: from all over so well, including the fact that, you know, Mr. Shah's name is of Persian
[Amit Varma]: origin, the elegant churidar kurtas of Mr. Modi are obviously of Islamic origin, and
[Amit Varma]: we assimilate it all beautifully and make our own. So to now to do this sort of othering
[Amit Varma]: that the government is doing is a radical act, not a conservative act.
[Guest]: No, so two points, right? First about the conservatism and radicalism. There is a famous
[Guest]: article by the American political scientist Samuel Huntington called conservatism as a
[Guest]: positional ideology, where he says that conservatism as a doctrine never has positive content,
[Guest]: it is not defined by certain tenets in the way that liberalism is. It is about saying
[Guest]: whether you are for change or you're against change effectively, right. And he says that,
[Guest]: you know, you can be a conservative in various contexts. And in that sense, he says that,
[Guest]: you know, those who are trying to uphold liberal values in America today against the onslaught
[Guest]: of communism in the Cold War are effectively conservatives, right. And in that context,
[Guest]: I'd say that all those people who are coming out in the streets are conservatives in as
[Guest]: much as they want to conserve the existing institutions and the framework of this country.
[Guest]: I think it is a very straightforwardly, you know, a conservative impulse, but on the assumption
[Guest]: that what we are trying to conserve on what we are trying to preserve, protect, you know,
[Amit Varma]: which is what our president is supposed to do under the oath of office, right? Protect
[Amit Varma]: and defend. The Huntington point is also made by Hayek in his famous essay, why I am a conservative
[Amit Varma]: where he says that, you know, they don't have ends, they're just a means, you know, they
[Guest]: just want to get everything to be the same. The second point which you made, which is
[Guest]: about, you know, what is the nature of society, what is Indian identity, and so on. That is
[Guest]: always a point of political, intellectual, ideological contestation, right? I think
[Guest]: every society tells certain stories of its own past for itself. Every society rests on
[Guest]: certain commonly accepted fictions, if I may put it that way, right? We all imagine certain
[Guest]: pasts for ourselves. But what is important about these imaginations is which of these
[Guest]: models do we find persuasive, right? It is in that sense that these acts of imagination
[Guest]: fundamentally are about political, they are about being able to persuade others to buy
[Guest]: into that vision. What the Indian National Congress and the leadership that got us independence,
[Guest]: brought the constitution into this country did, was to persuade that there was one reading
[Guest]: of Indian history, which was, which made for a better future for India than anything else.
[Guest]: And that was precisely this thing, right? This assimilative. Jawaharlal Nehru has this
[Guest]: famous metaphor in the discovery of India, where he says that India is an ancient palimpsest.
[Guest]: Line upon line has been written, but what has gone before has never been totally erased,
[Guest]: right? So in a sense, you know, there used to be a slogan when we were growing up in
[Guest]: schools, right? It used to be plastered on the wall saying unity and diversity. But actually,
[Guest]: the Indian National Congress and the Indian National Movement and the Constituent Assembly's
[Guest]: vision was not so much unity in diversity, but as reminding us that we are diverse in
[Guest]: our unities, that this is a country of extraordinary diversity, of all kinds, diversity at a scale
[Guest]: which is unprecedented in world history. And if we want to make a new nation state with
[Guest]: a new constitutional regime, we will have to accept and accommodate those diversities,
[Guest]: which is why the constitution of India is a constitution which is not, even though it
[Guest]: talks about a unitary state, it is not necessarily federal and it's this thing, but has a federal
[Guest]: complexion, has federal provisions. But its underlying vision is to say that, listen,
[Guest]: there are various forms of differences and asymmetries that we have to accommodate within
[Guest]: this country, which is why then you say that, listen, let's have personal laws, you know,
[Guest]: it's always better to have a uniform civil code. But the history of India, the moment
[Guest]: of partition suggested that it is better to let some identities gain confidence before
[Guest]: they themselves decide that they want to come forward and do things, right? So it was an
[Guest]: acceptance. It was a messy compromise. But that is what India at the time of independence
[Guest]: was. You know, you had to do that. And it was a working model. It was a work in progress.
[Guest]: Its success depends on its ability to persuade Indian citizens that this understanding of
[Guest]: our past is better. What the Hindutva project is about is an alternative understanding of
[Guest]: Indian past, which again, true to form, is effectively borrowed from colonial forms of
[Guest]: knowledge. It was the British who first taught us to think about our past as being divided
[Guest]: into a Hindu period, into a dark ages when the Muslims ruled over India. And then of
[Guest]: course, the onset of enlightenment with British blessings of liberty and prosperity into this
[Guest]: country, right? So that the tripartite periodization, which is at the heart of their thing, right?
[Guest]: So every time they say, oh, we are writing 600 year old wrongs, right? This was a period
[Guest]: of Muslim domination, we were enslaved, we were colonized, right? You are effectively
[Guest]: buying into that particular vision of India, which funnily enough, is a British vision,
[Guest]: right? So the greatest advocates of Bharatiyata in this country are the greatest prisoners
[Guest]: to the British Orientalist project, and its categories of knowledge and thought that they
[Guest]: left behind. So in a sense, if there is anybody who deserves decolonization, it is them.
[Amit Varma]: And I think I had an episode with Manu Pillai where we also kind of discuss this, how many
[Amit Varma]: of our own nations of what our civilization was like, have come from the narratives built
[Amit Varma]: by the British, because the British go to this new place, and they have to explain it
[Amit Varma]: to themselves. And typically, the early narratives of this will always be simplistic and will
[Amit Varma]: always contain binaries. And those narratives and narratives that we have somehow embraced
[Amit Varma]: unquestioningly and which now sort of dominate the discourse. And like you pointed out, you
[Amit Varma]: know, what is sort of remarkable about India as an experiment is obviously the incredible
[Amit Varma]: diversity, which is why the typical mistake that say Savarkar and the RSS made of looking
[Amit Varma]: at it more in European terms, where it's one nation, one state, and all of that is such
[Amit Varma]: a mistake. That's a fantasy. I mean, it's just...
[Guest]: And it's a fantasy and we can discuss it because the logic of those arguments is what is creating
[Guest]: the kind of turmoil that you see in the Northeast today, which is just one sort of place, example
[Guest]: of how tightly woven some of these diversities and this tapestry is, right? I mean, in a
[Guest]: sense, you pull at one thread, a lot of it can unravel. And you know, that's the kind
[Guest]: of thing. And of course, you know, Gandhi as always was an outlier to everything, right?
[Guest]: I mean, the originality of the man was precisely in that, you know, Gandhi has this wonderful
[Guest]: line where he says, happy is the country that has no history. He says, forget about history.
[Guest]: And in fact, it was Gandhi who carried the day even after his death in the Constituent
[Guest]: Assembly because people invoked him to say that Gandhiji said that every Muslim who has
[Guest]: gone to Pakistan should be free to come back to India and he should come back to India.
[Guest]: That was his vision. And that is what I think we tried to do. But obviously, within the
[Guest]: limitations of what the practicalities of the Constitution is. So, it was not a perfect
[Guest]: set of arrangements between Articles 5, 6 and 7. You know, a perfect arrangement would
[Guest]: have said that, you know, listen, why even have, you know, declared that those who left
[Guest]: for Pakistan are not citizens, right? I mean, you should in a sense have open-ended. But
[Guest]: the reality, as I said, was that the Constituent Assembly was grappling with this issue, not
[Guest]: just as a matter of principle, but were imminent practical exigencies, which impinged upon
[Guest]: the lives of millions and which excited the passions of millions more. So, you had to
[Guest]: strike those messy compromises. And frankly, that is what politics is about. This desire
[Guest]: for neat mathematical solutions of the kind that seems to animate our current politics,
[Guest]: right? That, you know, everything has to be sort of systematized. There is one nation,
[Guest]: there is one nationalism, there is one this thing. It's something that fundamentally goes
[Guest]: against the grain of the way that the Constituent Assembly thought about these things.
[Amit Varma]: Right. So, we have the framing of the Constitution. Our side, so to say, wins the debate. We have
[Amit Varma]: Article 5, 6, 7, you know, the citizenship by birth takes preeminence here. And it's
[Amit Varma]: an inclusive vision of citizenship, despite the sort of exclusive arguments made. But
[Amit Varma]: that's not, you know, the Constitution isn't like Upendra Bakshi, for example, makes a
[Amit Varma]: distinction between, quote, the constitutional state, the normative and aspirational framework
[Amit Varma]: enunciating the desired social order, and the political state as framework of competition
[Amit Varma]: for political power, or even the struggle to capture the constitutional state, stop
[Amit Varma]: code. So, you have the constitutional state, which is sort of that ideal, principled vision,
[Amit Varma]: which is laid down by the framers of the Constitution. But in actual politics, you have those contestations
[Amit Varma]: aren't settled in our actual politics, they are still going on. And in a sense, you could
[Amit Varma]: say that, you know, they have now come to the fore in a very big way. And those arguments
[Amit Varma]: are sort of taking place again. And I'd say that there's also perhaps a necessity to have
[Amit Varma]: those arguments again and win that argument again, as hopefully we are doing with all
[Amit Varma]: our protests and civil disobedience, rather than just hug back to the Constitution and
[Amit Varma]: say we won that argument. And the thing which I don't think we did win that argument, it's
[Guest]: still happening.
[Guest]: No, no. And I think Professor Bakshi's point also is to say that, in a sense, whatever
[Guest]: might be the sort of, you know, text of the Constitution, or laws on statute books, the
[Guest]: reality is that in administrative practice, there were still various kinds of discrimination
[Guest]: which were practiced, which is what he's referring to, right. And then we have historians like
[Guest]: Vazira Zamindar, who have pointed out that how even after all of these things happened,
[Guest]: you know, Muslims who are seeking to return, come back to India, were because of a range
[Guest]: of administrative measures effectively kind of made it very difficult for them to come
[Guest]: back and claim their properties. And the evacuate property story is a very long one. I don't
[Guest]: want to get into that digression. But, you know, this is absolutely true, in a sense,
[Guest]: you know, there's no argument is ever won just by, you know, getting a law passed. So
[Guest]: to that extent, that was true. What I also buy the argument is that in some ways, it
[Guest]: is important for this kind of discussion to happen. I'm not so sure whether we have won
[Guest]: as yet, or whether we will even win. I mean, a lot will depend on what the government does
[Guest]: and what the courts do.
[Amit Varma]: And a lot also depends on how we define victory. For example, even if a majority of the people
[Amit Varma]: agree with us, the first pass the post system means that, you know, it's just very messy.
[Guest]: And that's the system we've signed up to. So we also have to play by the rules of the
[Guest]: game, right? So I mean, so I think that is, but your point, I think, is important, which
[Guest]: is to say that the mere fact of the discussion, and the fact that we are sitting here and
[Guest]: talking about these things, as are so many, you know, millions of people out there, itself
[Guest]: is a good sign, because, you know, constitutional sort of, you know, values need to be embraced
[Guest]: by a society at large. That was Ambedkar's fundamental point, right? He said, you can
[Guest]: write any book that you want. But if the society at large and its normative values are going
[Guest]: to be totally untouched by those things, then it's just a top dressing on a totally different
[Guest]: kind of soil, right? So that that is the point, right? So constitutional cultures have to
[Guest]: be created. And in other contexts, they are created by these kinds of movements, they
[Guest]: are created by these kinds of struggles. We've seen it happening in country after country,
[Guest]: you know, notions of rights of freedom are never closed, they continue to expand, you
[Guest]: know, even in the context of Indian citizenship, and the way that people thought about it,
[Guest]: there were various kinds of exclusion, there were gendered exclusions, there were, you
[Guest]: know, exclusions around religion, etc, in practice, which had to be overcome, right?
[Guest]: So and then even, as we discussed in the context of Assam, there's an entirely different set
[Guest]: of history and practical politics that you have to deal with. So there is no taking away
[Guest]: from any of that. In fact, my point is precisely the opposite, which is that the beauty of
[Guest]: the Constituent Assembly debates and this thing is precisely their willingness to balance
[Guest]: principle and pragmatic immediate choices, and then to say how best to be sort of cope
[Amit Varma]: with these things. It is not an exercise in abstraction. And it's actually very fascinating
[Amit Varma]: for that reason, that it is, you know, that they are framing that constitution which embodies
[Amit Varma]: those principles at the same time as there is violence and bloodshed on the streets.
[Amit Varma]: And they have to figure out a sort of way to make it work. You know, you mentioned gendered
[Amit Varma]: inclusions and, you know, something that really has no relevance to the subject on hand, particularly
[Amit Varma]: today, but is an interesting sidelight and is also an illustration of our inherent sexism
[Amit Varma]: as a society is, you know, in December 1949, the Abducted Persons Recovery and Restoration
[Amit Varma]: Act. And, you know, to read about all the things that happened today is, you know, just
[Amit Varma]: shocks me even from this distance, where basically the Abducted Persons Recovery and Restoration
[Amit Varma]: Act laid down a date after which all mixed unions that is unions between men and women
[Amit Varma]: belonging to different religions would be treated as cases where women had been abducted
[Amit Varma]: and forcibly married or converted. Now, the thing is that obviously, a lot of women on
[Amit Varma]: both sides of the border were abducted and these things did happen. But the assumption
[Amit Varma]: was that all marriages would be treated as cases of abduction if they were of mixed religions,
[Amit Varma]: as if, you know, inter-religious marriage was otherwise impossible or so unusual. And
[Amit Varma]: this led to dual paradigm of recovery and restoration, where these women would be recovered
[Amit Varma]: and then restored to, you know, whichever side they were, quote unquote, again, abducted
[Amit Varma]: from. And, you know, Gopal in her book makes this exceptional point that, quote, this entailed
[Amit Varma]: not only determining the religion at birth of a woman, almost as if it were a biological
[Amit Varma]: characteristic, but also her biological status as a woman whose body had been violated, impregnated
[Amit Varma]: and otherwise defiled by union with a male of another religious community. A powerful
[Amit Varma]: patriarchal nationalism informed such interpretations of the abducted woman's body as a metaphor
[Amit Varma]: for national purity, honor and morality. And now the critical line, women's citizenship
[Amit Varma]: was thus produced by three concentric circles, the citizenship of a father or husband, religious
[Amit Varma]: identity and on the basis of the first two, her imputed national identity, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And it kind of strikes me how, you know, in every debate that we have about different
[Amit Varma]: crisis in India, there is a deeper crisis when it comes to women within that domain.
[Amit Varma]: For example, we can talk about the crisis in agriculture, but it's actually far worse
[Amit Varma]: for women in agriculture, and so on across different domains. And it strikes me that
[Amit Varma]: in this whole citizenship debate, we are still talking about the citizenship of men and women
[Guest]: are just treated as property in a sense.
[Guest]: Oh, yeah. I mean, I think patriarchy is kind of turtles all the way down when it comes
[Guest]: to this thing. And, you know, in fact, apart from Professor Dayal's book, I'd recommend
[Guest]: Amrita Pritam's story, Pinjar, which was also later on made into a very powerful movie,
[Guest]: which actually captures what could be the kinds of relationships in which people were
[Guest]: caught up. And why this, you know, assumption to make the woman's body the sort of symbol
[Guest]: of national purity, etc, proved to be so wrong. And as a parenthesis, I will say that, you
[Guest]: know, a similar kind of problem also played out in the context of Bangladesh, after its
[Guest]: liberation when women who are victims of sexual violence and the children that they conceived,
[Guest]: as a result, were deprived of citizenship of the state, because, you know, they were
[Guest]: not so the women were hailed as Biranganas, as you know, sort of this thing. So on the
[Guest]: one hand, you hail the women. On the other hand, you deny citizenship to the children
[Guest]: that they had to conceive.
[Guest]: Because they were quote unquote, defiled in some way.
[Guest]: Exactly, right. So, so, so we are very much and this is not just India, but, you know,
[Guest]: well beyond the subcontinent, these kinds of practices do play out.
[Amit Varma]: Right. So after the Constitution sort of frames Article 5, 6, 7, you then have the Citizenship
[Amit Varma]: Act of 1955. What is this about? What is the impetus? And where are we now when this act
[Guest]: happens?
[Guest]: So, as I said, the Constituent Assembly had always envisioned that the parliament would
[Guest]: legislate on citizenship, and that the provisions that they were debating were to set some fundamental
[Guest]: principles in place, and to cater for the immediate problems that were considering.
[Guest]: And the reality is that by the time the government of India catered with the so called immediate,
[Guest]: so many years had to pass, because as I said, partition was a process, it is not an event.
[Guest]: And so it's only 1955 that the Citizenship Act comes in. And that is the act which is
[Guest]: today being amended. So it's important to sort of, you know, note that timeline 1955.
[Amit Varma]: So the Citizenship Amendment Bill or CAB, as we call it today, amends the Citizenship
[Amit Varma]: Act.
[Guest]: Act of 1955. Right. The Citizenship Act is actually it's fairly straightforward. It basically
[Guest]: says that an illegal migrant in India is a foreigner who has come to India without a
[Guest]: proper visa, or who has overstayed in India after the expiry of whatever permit he had
[Guest]: to come to India, he or she. Yeah. So that is one kind of very clear thing, you know,
[Guest]: which which takes away from all these things about, you know, whether you're a refugee,
[Guest]: persecution, minority, you know, which religion, etc. Right. As far as citizenship itself is
[Guest]: concerned, it created certain clear categories under which citizenship could be given. And
[Guest]: again, we don't need to sort of get into it, the text of the bill is available on the web
[Guest]: for our listeners to go back and read if they're interested. But broadly speaking, it talked
[Guest]: about birth, parentage or descent, registration, naturalization, the kinds of things that are
[Guest]: quite normal, it outlined the various ways in which a person could become a citizen of
[Guest]: India, right. And those are the fundamental bedrock provisions on which citizenship in
[Guest]: this country and its regime has been constituted. Assam constitutes the sort of, you know, different
[Guest]: and exceptional zone to this, we'll come to Assam in a bit. But I think it's at this point
[Guest]: of time worth talking a little bit about how the sort of use solely conception, which is
[Guest]: kind of at least upheld in principle, in this thing, and more or less embodied in the context
[Guest]: of the 55 bill is already undergoing certain kinds of changes when the BJP government under
[Guest]: Prime Minister Vajpayee was in place, right. So in 2003, there is a amendment to the Citizenship
[Guest]: Act, which is also bought in, which actually makes an interesting point, it says it modifies
[Guest]: the clause for citizenship by birth, which allows you know, either you're born in India
[Guest]: or either of your parents are India, to exclude persons born in India, one of whose parents
[Guest]: was an illegal migrant at the time of their birth. So even if you're born of India to
[Guest]: one parent who is an Indian, it would not suffice, right. Now, this might seem like
[Guest]: saying, oh, listen, but we are talking about both parents actually being migrants, right.
[Guest]: But what it brings in is a certain conception that there are illegal migrants are foreign
[Guest]: to the body politic. And in that sense, their offspring cannot claim, right. And this is
[Guest]: one particular amendment to the act, which is bought in. And again, it was bought in
[Guest]: broadly in the context of these concerns about illegal immigration, etc, which are driving
[Guest]: our current debates as well. There was one more thing which was kind of important, which
[Guest]: is the amendment to the citizenship rules of 1956, right, like, you know, the rules
[Guest]: are framed after an act is passed. Now, the 2004 amendment to the citizenship rules, delegated
[Guest]: powers to grant citizenships, yeah, particularly to district collectors in the two states of
[Guest]: Rajasthan, Gujarat, both of which have borders with Pakistan. And here it explicitly catered
[Guest]: for minority Hindus with Pakistani citizenship, who had migrated to India more than five years
[Guest]: back, right. So, in a sense, it said that for those people, they could have various
[Guest]: other kinds. So, a special category has already been created already on the basis of religion.
[Guest]: But this is not done in the act. It is done through the provision of the rules. And it
[Guest]: is done for very specific locality where there is an issue of this thing. And at that point
[Guest]: of time, this was also targeted at maybe around 11 or 12,000 people who Hindus who had come
[Guest]: to Pakistan after the, you know, violence that racked all of the subcontinent post the
[Guest]: demolition of the Babri Masjid, right. There were violence in Bangladesh, there was violence
[Guest]: in Pakistan as well. And these were Hindu communities which are abstract from Pakistan.
[Guest]: And so, in a sense, you could argue that, listen, this is an administrative measure.
[Guest]: But nevertheless, as you know, we discussed earlier, administrative measures can sort
[Guest]: of seep into and bring in various other kinds of principles into the laws that we're talking
[Guest]: about, right. So, that was already being done. Now, when the BJP government under Prime Minister
[Guest]: Modi comes back to power, it effectively issues a couple of notifications in 2015 and 2016,
[Guest]: which presage the constitutional amendment bill that they sort of introduced and passed
[Guest]: in this parliament, right. And which says that it exempts Hindus, Sikhs, Buddhists,
[Guest]: Jains, Parsis, Christians from the three countries of Pakistan, Bangladesh, Afghanistan, from
[Guest]: the provisions of the Passport Act, etc., in a sense that they would not be treated
[Guest]: as sort of illegal migrants, right. And it said specifically that these were if they
[Guest]: were compelled to seek shelter in India due to religious persecution, or the fear of religious
[Guest]: persecution, right. So, this provision, even before it is enshrined in law, is already
[Guest]: being enshrined in the administrative kind of, you know, sort of procedures for this.
[Guest]: And it said that for these people, because they should not be treated as illegal migrants,
[Guest]: they can actually apply for a five year visa, which will then allow them to stay on, etc.
[Guest]: And then you have the citizenship amendment bill, which takes the same provisions, embodies
[Guest]: it in law and says that the cutoff date is 2014. And everyone who has come before that,
[Guest]: who belongs to these communities, which is to say everyone minus Muslims, from these
[Guest]: states, which is Pakistan, Afghanistan, Bangladesh, which are Muslim majority states, those alone
[Guest]: can be eligible for a separate track for gaining citizenship. So, Muslims or refugees from
[Guest]: other countries like Sri Lanka, etc., are not eligible to get citizenship under this
[Guest]: thing, which is a clearly discriminatory. So, all of this is just by way of saying that
[Guest]: things have been already changing. But the change which has now been brought in, is being
[Guest]: brought in explicitly as a law. The second point I want to make in this connection is
[Guest]: that there have been videos circulated on WhatsApp by the IT cell and its functionaries,
[Guest]: which are quoting Dr. Manmohan Singh as leader of opposition in the Rajya Sabha in 2003,
[Guest]: speaking at the time when the citizenship amendment of 2003 was being debated, as saying
[Guest]: that we should have other pathways for or more liberal ways of granting citizenship
[Guest]: to people who are fleeing religious persecution. Now, that is true. But what he was making
[Guest]: a case was for people who are fleeing a religious persecution, not to say that certain communities
[Guest]: alone should be favored or not. In fact, it is very interesting. And people seem to have
[Guest]: forgotten that in 2012, the then secretary, General Secretary of the Communist Party of
[Guest]: India Marxist, Prakash Karat, actually wrote a letter to Prime Minister Manmohan Singh,
[Guest]: reminding him precisely of the speech and saying that we should bring in more liberal
[Guest]: provisions for grant of citizenship for people who are fleeing persecution from Bangladesh.
[Guest]: And he was, of course, talking about the Hindu minorities who might have come and they were
[Guest]: an important, so to speak, vote bank for the CPM in Bengal as well, right? I mean, so in
[Guest]: a sense, everyone plays these games. But the reality is that neither Dr. Singh nor Prakash
[Guest]: Karat were talking about bringing in such a patently discriminatory legislation. And
[Guest]: I think that should be stated very clearly. I think this country definitely needs a good
[Guest]: law for refugees. We have not acceded to the UN conventions on these issues. We definitely
[Guest]: need good legislation. But what we don't need is a legislation, which under the garb of
[Guest]: providing citizenship to refugees, effectively is discriminatory and alongside the NRC creates
[Guest]: a situation where a lot of people can be consigned to a legal limbo.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and it strikes me as two observations here. One is really a question and the observation
[Amit Varma]: one is that how for a lot of this you essentially need to read between the lines and you need
[Amit Varma]: to consider context. For example, like you said, a refugee law is a great thing. If you
[Amit Varma]: just look at the CAB in an abstract that persecuted minorities from all of these countries will
[Amit Varma]: be given blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. It sounds great until you realize what they left out.
[Amit Varma]: And this omission is a deliberate one because time after time you will actually see for
[Amit Varma]: example Amit Shah on his speeches and there are many videos of this, where he will talk
[Amit Varma]: about all the different religions which would be accepted, you know, when they are refugees.
[Amit Varma]: And the one notable omission always, of course, is Muslims and you know, combined with the
[Amit Varma]: NRC, when you get that sort of context, you realize what's going on. The other point that
[Amit Varma]: I'm slightly puzzled about and completely ignorant of really is that, look, I get it
[Amit Varma]: that parties do things, parties have these tropes which go on over years, if not decades.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, you spoke about how Karate is, for example, thinking of his vote bank when
[Amit Varma]: he made the request that he did. Now, I get a lot of the Hindutva tropes have been coming
[Amit Varma]: from the 1910s 1920s. So you know, cow slaughter is an old one. Love Jihad is an old one from
[Amit Varma]: after independence, we have the Hindu code bill and blah, blah, blah. All of these are
[Amit Varma]: standard tropes, anti Muslim tropes, often anti Dalit tropes, they've been coming around.
[Amit Varma]: But this particular trope of, you know, Muslim migrants specifically being left out, sort
[Amit Varma]: of baffles me a bit because I see them as, you know, on the one hand, the whole RSS movement
[Amit Varma]: is right out of Nagpur. And on the other hand, the BJP is largely a North Indian party till
[Amit Varma]: recently when they are sort of, and now of course, they're expanding in all of these
[Amit Varma]: places. This is not such a huge issue, is it? I mean, it, it affects such a small number
[Amit Varma]: of people. I think when Nehru spoke of these kinds of migrants, once people who are coming
[Amit Varma]: back from Pakistan, I think he mentioned the whole debate as being dust on a pan. It's
[Amit Varma]: a minuscule number of people. Why is it then such a huge issue?
[Guest]: Well, for one thing that in the particular context of Assam and Northeast of India, which
[Guest]: we will talk about, it was not dust in the pan as it turned out, right? I mean, the flow
[Guest]: of people, etc, continued for much longer. Again, the numbers are very unclear because
[Guest]: there are no reliable statistics, but it has effectively, it has been an issue, which is
[Guest]: at most in the minds of people of that religion. And that has been then since, you know, taken
[Guest]: over by the BJP and imported onto the national agenda, right? So in a sense, this whole category
[Guest]: of somebody called an infiltrator, and to contrast that infiltrator with a refugee,
[Guest]: right? So, like Mr. Shah says, there are Sharanarthi, who's a refugee, and there is Ghuspetia, who's
[Guest]: an infiltrator. So we will pull the infiltrators out, right? Now, is anyone going to be able
[Guest]: to really establish whether they have fled because of religious persecution, etc, etc?
[Guest]: It's obviously as a practical point, it is moot. I think the answer is very well known.
[Guest]: But the reality is that this kind of a distinction allows them to make an important point, which
[Guest]: goes back to your earlier point, which is that I think the one very important thing
[Guest]: we have to recognize about the BJP's approach to these questions, right? And this is not
[Guest]: just about the current BJP, but I think it goes back all the way to Mr. Advani's invocation
[Guest]: of this notion of pseudo secularism, is that the BJP has found ways of actually packaging
[Guest]: each of these substantial changes that it wants to bring about to the constitutional
[Guest]: sort of fabric of this country, by presenting it as if they are the vindication of various
[Guest]: kinds of progressive liberal agendas, which all of us should actually sort of most welcome.
[Guest]: Why would you protest against criminalization of triple talaq? It is about Muslim women's
[Guest]: rights. Yeah, you're talking about patriarchy, Amit? How can you oppose it? That's the question,
[Guest]: right? How can you say that, listen, we are opposed to Article 370? It is about fighting
[Guest]: terrorism and ensuring unity of this country. Do you support terrorism? You don't, right?
[Guest]: So how can you support this? Why will you oppose a uniform civil code, when we agree
[Guest]: that we are all liberal citizens, and that it's now been such a long time? How can we
[Guest]: say that it's not right, let alone the fact that, you know, there are Ambedkar resigned
[Guest]: over the Hindu code bill? Let's face it, he was unhappy with what was being offered to
[Guest]: the Hindus, because he thought that was not going far enough. Right? In a sense, if you're
[Guest]: talking about uniform civil code, the Hindu code has as many problems as any other code
[Guest]: of any other community in this country has. And hopefully, we'll have a chance to discuss
[Guest]: that at some point of time. In fact, it has materially benefited the Hindus much more
[Amit Varma]: than any civil laws of any other community. I have a feeling the next time we'll do an
[Guest]: episode is when the uniform civil code is. So anyway, as we move from legislation to
[Guest]: legislation and history to history, but but the point is that they have captured this
[Guest]: language, right? And again, today, you know, while on the campaign trail, Mr. Shah, and
[Guest]: subsequently, if you read, you know, the publications of the, you know, RSS, you know, they've been
[Guest]: very clear that the CAB and NRC are processes. And in fact, the correct sequence is CAB should
[Guest]: have come first. In fact, that is a criticism of the NRC in...
[Amit Varma]: And this is something mind you, this is something there are these lot of defenses being made
[Amit Varma]: on Twitter about how these two are not connected. And as as if we are concocting them, but there
[Amit Varma]: are videos of Amit Shah specifically using the word sequencing, where he's talking about
[Guest]: how they go together. So like, come on. No, but the reality is that now that they
[Guest]: understand that people have gotten this nexus between these two things, and that is in some
[Guest]: ways driving a lot of the concern around this thing. The attempt over the last three, four
[Guest]: days has been effectively to say that these are completely different things, right? So
[Guest]: you have all these FAQs being given by unnamed, unsigned, you know, sources within the government
[Guest]: which are... Alleged government releases.
[Guest]: Yeah, ANI and others are putting it out, right? Saying that, listen, why should the CAA, the
[Guest]: citizenship amendment, which has been bought in, is actually about giving citizenship,
[Guest]: it is not about taking citizenship away. So why are you guys assuming that anybody's citizenship
[Guest]: is going to be deprived, right? So you leave NRC out of the picture altogether, right?
[Guest]: And then when you asked about the NRC, you say, listen, the rules are yet to be framed.
[Guest]: We will frame them in such liberal ways that, right? So, in a sense, this invites us to
[Guest]: a certain form of politics, you know, which the great German writer and film director
[Guest]: Alexander Kluge calls learning processes with a deadly outcome, right? If you are going
[Guest]: to sit around, what they want us to do is to wait and see how this plays out. That's
[Guest]: what Mr. Shah has said. Please wait, see how it plays out. Yeah, that is their line. For
[Guest]: the rest of us, we have to understand that the outcome might actually be very deadly
[Guest]: for a lot of us.
[Amit Varma]: And Prime Minister Modi said the same thing about demonetization, give me a chance, wait
[Guest]: 50 days and blah, blah, blah.
[Guest]: Yeah, exactly. So, in that sense, that has been the way that they are packaging. Now,
[Guest]: again, I will say that, you know, you have to commend them for their ideological consistency
[Guest]: on these issues. They do have a majority. But as we discussed earlier, parliamentary
[Guest]: majority does not mean that you have all the rights to overturn every constitutional principle.
[Guest]: So long as people are willing to stand up for them, the courts are willing to stand
[Guest]: up for the constitution. I think there is a point still to be made, whether it gets
[Guest]: us anywhere or not, I don't know. But I think the point should be made and is being made.
[Amit Varma]: So Srinath, let's let's kind of move on now. And let's talk about Assam, because Assam
[Amit Varma]: sort of is at the focus of a lot of this talk. And that is something that, you know, that's
[Amit Varma]: a game that's been playing out for much longer than the last 70 years and much before independence.
[Amit Varma]: And the point is, the migration has been a burning issue there from well within colonial
[Amit Varma]: times.
[Guest]: That's right. And I think, Assam has emerged as a major flashpoint in the current discussion.
[Guest]: And it has its own peculiarities. And I think it is important to understand those peculiarities
[Guest]: both so as not to flatten out the picture of trying to say that, listen, everybody is
[Guest]: kind of broadly thinking about the same sets of things. And secondly, also to not to tar
[Guest]: the Assamese sort of protests with possibly a wrong brush, right? We have to understand
[Guest]: their concerns from their point of view as well, before we arrive at quick judgments
[Guest]: about what those things are, right?
[Guest]: And as you said, Assam, the history of Assam in the 20th century, and even in fact, already
[Guest]: from the late 19th century has been very strongly shaped by waves of migration, right? And it's
[Guest]: important to understand what are the various kinds of things that are of concern here,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: So, you know, the ethnic Assamese or the Khilonjiya, as they are nowadays referred to, they have
[Guest]: had to deal with various kinds of influxes of people and their identity has been shaped
[Guest]: as all identities tend to be in some degree of contradistinction with these various kinds
[Guest]: of things, right?
[Guest]: So, on the one hand, they had to face the influx of upper caste Hindu-Bengalis, particularly
[Guest]: from Silat, which is actually a Bengal dominated district.
[Guest]: Now in Bangladesh.
[Guest]: Yeah, now with Bangladesh, but under colonial once, you know, the British Raj had taken
[Guest]: over what is today's Assam, they had attached this Bengali majority district on to Assam.
[Guest]: And a lot of the administration, the bureaucracy of the British Raj as it operated, the provincial
[Guest]: government as it operated in Assam was actually staffed by these Bengali speaking upper caste
[Guest]: Hindus who came from Silat, right?
[Guest]: And this is also a period when the Bengali language was coming into its own as part of
[Guest]: the so called Bengal Renaissance.
[Guest]: So, there is a, you know, a degree of cultural assertiveness of the Bengalis of pride in
[Guest]: their language and culture, which naturally creates and goes against what the Assamese,
[Guest]: you know, so there is a, there is a fundamental problem, right?
[Guest]: Just as in the case of say, a state like Burma, you know, Burmese's relationship with the
[Guest]: British Raj is mediated through various people who were staffing the civil service who are
[Guest]: actually people of Indian origin, or of other peoples like your mercantile communities,
[Guest]: which are Chettiyars from what is today's Tamil Nadu, right, who are operating there.
[Guest]: So it's a very similar situation.
[Guest]: So it's not an unmediated relationship.
[Amit Varma]: It is mediated through the Bengali Hindus, through a separate elite, which in this case
[Guest]: happens to be not an Assamese elite, but Bengalis, they are Bengali speaking Hindus.
[Guest]: I think that's the first point to make.
[Guest]: Now, from the turn of the 20th century, right, around 1901 or thereabouts, because that's
[Guest]: the time and census figures we have, we experience what the great historian of Bangladesh, William
[Guest]: Van Schendel, calls the closing of the agrarian frontier of East Bengal, by which he means
[Guest]: that per capita pressure of people on every square kilometre of land in East Bengal becomes
[Guest]: so much, there are so many more people than the land can support, that there is a natural
[Guest]: migration of people from the closing frontier in search of other spaces, which where they
[Guest]: can work, where they can get some land.
[Guest]: So a lot of them are willing to go and work in parts of Assam, where, you know, others,
[Guest]: which are seen as areas which are there, right.
[Guest]: So there is, as with every migration, there is a pull factor, and there is a push factor,
[Guest]: right.
[Guest]: So in this case, the push factor is the closing of the agrarian frontier of Bengal.
[Guest]: And particularly, we see that, you know, from the district of Maimansingh, of Pabna, of
[Guest]: Rangpur, there is a huge influx of Bengali speaking Muslims from East Bengal, many of
[Guest]: whom are people who are looking to work some piece of land where they can live and survive
[Guest]: work, right, because agrarian Bengal is basically facing a form of involution.
[Guest]: And that becomes a very important thing, right.
[Guest]: And this is pre-independence.
[Guest]: This is again pre-independence, but the numbers are pretty striking, the number of people
[Guest]: who sort of come in, and who are there.
[Guest]: So there is a push factor, but there is also a pull factor.
[Guest]: The British Raj sees this as a great opportunity to put more areas of Assam under various forms
[Guest]: of agriculture, thereby enabling them to draw more land revenue.
[Guest]: So they also enable these people to sort of come.
[Guest]: So there is a push and there's a pull because of which agricultural migrant labor from East
[Guest]: Bengal, majority of them Muslim speaking Bengalis come into this and those communities settle
[Guest]: in various parts of the Singh in the Brahmaputra Valley and other parts, you know, even today
[Guest]: they are referred to as MIAs, MIA Muslims, right, the MIAs are basically people who came
[Guest]: from Maiman Singh, but there were people who came from other parts as well, as I said,
[Guest]: of these adjoining areas of East Bengal.
[Guest]: So you had Hindu Bengalis with whom you have a problem, then you have this huge influx
[Guest]: of Muslim Bengalis and the Assamese feel that, listen, you know, this is, you know, and the
[Guest]: whole pre partition history of Assam, in some ways, revolves around this question of how
[Guest]: do we deal with these two things?
[Guest]: How do we first of all get Silat out of this thing so that we are beyond the domination
[Guest]: of these Bengalis?
[Guest]: Secondly, how do we deal with this problem of these extraordinary numbers of people who
[Guest]: are waves of immigration, which is happening and which seems to be changing the demography
[Guest]: and and the leaders of the Assam, you know, provincial Congress, etc, always made it a
[Guest]: point to tell the national leadership that, you know, we want the Indian nation, but you
[Guest]: have to understand our peculiar problems as well.
[Guest]: And these are there, right?
[Guest]: And then they never got the kind of traction because as today, back then, Northeast is
[Guest]: seen as not just on the margins of the map of India, but on our mental maps as well,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: So it never really got the kind of traction that it did.
[Guest]: But around the time of partition, the politics of Assam became quite heated, right?
[Guest]: Because there was a feeling that, listen, we may well lose all of Assam to Pakistan,
[Guest]: if an eastern wing of it was created, and it was the Congress leaders of Assam were
[Guest]: the forefront of the opposition to the so called, you know, the cabinet mission plan
[Guest]: of 1946, which talked about some kind of a confederal arrangement, but we should have
[Guest]: clubbed Assam with the eastern province of Bengal as well, right?
[Guest]: And that the Assamese did not want to, and they fought tooth and nail.
[Guest]: And anyway, you had partition, Silat, as I said earlier on, there was a referendum and
[Guest]: it was, you know, attached now, then to East Pakistan subsequently became part of Bangladesh,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: You have this problem.
[Guest]: But what happens in the context of the eastern end of the partition of India, which is Bengal
[Guest]: and Assam, and is that, you know, both Indian and Pakistani leaders, funnily enough, assume
[Guest]: that unlike the Punjab, you know, here, minorities are broadly going to stay put, because there's
[Guest]: not that much of large scale violence, you know, in Punjab, there was a conflagration,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: And one of the members of the Constituent Assembly debates calls it a holocaust, even
[Guest]: at that time, right?
[Guest]: It's recognized as an issue of that gravity.
[Guest]: Whereas in Bengal, you don't get that kind of sense that there's that extraordinary level
[Guest]: of violence which is happening, right?
[Guest]: And there are periodic strokes of violence.
[Guest]: In one of our previous episodes, we talked about the Bengal crisis of 1950, which comes
[Guest]: out of a communal sort of riots in both places.
[Guest]: You know, there is a movement of people, that particular episode comes to an end due to
[Guest]: an agreement between Nehru and the Pakistani Prime Minister Liaquat Ali Khan, which says
[Guest]: that minority rights in both places will be protected, minorities can go back, they can
[Guest]: take possession of property, etc, right?
[Guest]: Now, the Liaquat Ali Khan, you know, the Nehru-Liaquat pact also then enables in some ways, a further
[Guest]: sort of movement of people back and forth, right?
[Guest]: And the Assamese are continuously concerned by what they think is the apathy of the government
[Guest]: of India towards their particular concern, they feel, you know, all your laws, everything
[Guest]: is very focused on what's happening in the western borders, but you know, you've just
[Guest]: left Assam, more or less to this thing.
[Guest]: But nevertheless, under the urging of the Assam government, the central government of
[Guest]: India in 1950, passes an act, which is called the Immigrants Expulsion from Assam Act of
[Guest]: 1950.
[Guest]: It's an act passed by the parliament, especially for Assam, which says that, listen, if there
[Guest]: are illegal migrants who are in Assam, there must be provisions whereby they can be sent
[Guest]: back from there, right?
[Guest]: But what happens is that soon after this act is bought into place, you have the Nehru-Liaquat
[Guest]: Pact, which is seen as diluting these two things.
[Guest]: So as a further way of assuaging the concerns of Assamese and of dealing with the particular
[Guest]: problem of this kind of constant flow of people through what was a porous border, in 1951,
[Guest]: the Assam government undertook the exercise called NRC, National Register for Citizens,
[Guest]: which was an exercise which was conducted solely in Assam and was twinned with the census
[Guest]: of 1952, right?
[Guest]: So they basically took more details than what a census would including address and they
[Guest]: maintain that for district by district.
[Guest]: So that is the original NRC, right?
[Guest]: So what is happening now is effectively an exercise for sort of whatever, recreating
[Guest]: that NRC, updating it, so to speak, right?
[Guest]: So that is when 1951 is when the first kind of NRC type exercise is brought in.
[Guest]: But the reality is that even then, the flow of migrants because of these kinds of natural
[Guest]: factors, you know, that it is a what you might think of as a secularly driven thing, right?
[Guest]: It is not just that Hindus from East Pakistan are coming, but even Muslim migrants from
[Guest]: East Pakistan still came to Assam in search of work, you know, they would be temporary,
[Guest]: they'd come, they'd go back, it's a porous border, and so on, right?
[Guest]: Particularly in the years 1964 and 65, you had a, you know, important uptick.
[Guest]: You know, we have numbers, particularly for Hindu migrants of that period in the National
[Guest]: Archives, which I looked up as part of one of my earlier pieces of research and, you
[Guest]: know, in between 1964 and 65, in just those two years, you had over 800,000 Hindus who
[Guest]: came from East Pakistan to India.
[Guest]: And these were particularly peak years, because in 1964, again, there was a bit of a communal
[Guest]: riot all across subcontinent, you know, there's this incident in Kashmir, where a relic, which
[Guest]: is believed to be the hair of the Prophet Muhammad, it's called the Muwai Muqaddas,
[Guest]: was lost, or was stolen.
[Guest]: And there was a huge this thing.
[Guest]: And at that point of time, there were riots, and then the movement happened, right?
[Guest]: But so you didn't have those kinds of peaks, but those were sort of controllable.
[Guest]: But 1964, 65, again, then becomes an important year, because that's the period when there's
[Guest]: a significant spike.
[Amit Varma]: What causes I mean, is there anything that causes a spike in particular?
[Guest]: As I said, it was primarily over those, you know, the fact was that, you know, the Prophet's
[Guest]: hair was supposed to have gone missing from the Hazrat Bal.
[Guest]: And that then leads to a lot of protests amongst the Muslims and agitation.
[Guest]: And then there are communal riots, which happened not just in India, but in other parts of the
[Guest]: subcontinent as well, Pakistan and East Pakistan.
[Guest]: So you have Hindus fleeing from basically refugees.
[Guest]: So again, what we see is that, you know, it is usually events around these kinds of things,
[Guest]: right, which tend to give post partition big spikes.
[Guest]: As I said, you know, post the Babri Masjid, there was again, in more recent times, nothing
[Guest]: of comparable numbers, but still, there was even from Bangladesh, as well as Pakistan,
[Guest]: you had Hindus coming in.
[Guest]: So that is what you have.
[Guest]: So anyway, so in order to deal with this burgeoning problem, the Assam government in 1964, brings
[Guest]: in a piece of legislation, which is called the Foreigners Tribunal Order, which basically
[Guest]: sets up a series of tribunals in order to identify people who are illegal migrants into
[Guest]: Assam, and then to send them back to the other side, right.
[Guest]: And these tribunals are active from about late 1969 till March 1973, at which point
[Guest]: of time the tribunals are wound up because it is felt that they have more or less done
[Guest]: their job, whoever had to be identified had been done, right.
[Guest]: But this is also the period when another cataclysm happens in the subcontinent is the 1971 war.
[Guest]: And the flow of approximately 10 million refugees from Bangladesh into India.
[Guest]: Which we have had an episode on.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: So people who are interested in the background can go back and listen.
[Guest]: But what I want to say is that, you know, that the extraordinary flow of the refugees
[Guest]: into India, at one stroke threatened the demographic balance of a number of parts of North India,
[Guest]: right.
[Guest]: A state like Tripura, for instance, I mean, it had three times the number of, you know,
[Guest]: refugees than it had local people.
[Guest]: And in some ways, its demographic composition was unalterably changed because of that.
[Guest]: But and the Indian government's own resolution and desire to ensure that these people went
[Guest]: back was ultimately the reason why they went to war, right, because you wanted to create
[Guest]: conditions where those refugees go back.
[Guest]: That was Mrs. Gandhi's demand from the beginning to the end.
[Amit Varma]: Because it was unviable, basically, for India to manage so many refugees, but you can't
[Amit Varma]: send them back as long as there's a genocide happening, which in a sense there was.
[Amit Varma]: So the best thing is that you, you know, get rid of the circumstances which make it unfriendly.
[Guest]: So 10 million refugees, the numbers are obviously mind boggling for a poor country like India,
[Guest]: but they were all concentrated in areas where refugees and migrants and immigration was
[Guest]: already such a problematic issue, right?
[Guest]: So you have to see it in that context.
[Guest]: Now, what happens is that in 1972, after the Bangladesh war is over, Mrs. Gandhi goes to
[Guest]: Dhaka and there is a sort of a set of things that she discusses with Sheikh Mujibur Rahman.
[Guest]: And one of the things which they agree is that when we are talking about the repatriation
[Guest]: of refugees from India back to Bangladesh, the cutoff date for deciding who are the people
[Guest]: who should be repatriated was 24th of March 1971, because it's on 25th that the crackdown
[Guest]: by the Pakistan army begins.
[Guest]: So they say that anyone who came before the 24th of March will not be seen as, you know,
[Guest]: someone who has to be deported, right?
[Guest]: So in effect, they are somehow de facto to be accommodated within India, and they have
[Guest]: to do it, right?
[Guest]: Now, this is again, an international agreement, which or whatever, an understanding which
[Guest]: she sort of, you know, arrives at in order to solve a problem and to maintain good relations
[Guest]: with this new state that you have helped to create, right?
[Guest]: But it has repercussions for you domestically.
[Guest]: Because what happens is that then the movement in Assam then tends to become to say that,
[Guest]: listen, if you are really going to say that, you know, everyone who has only, you know,
[Guest]: come before 1971 can stay on, what are we talking about, right?
[Guest]: What happens to all those people who came from 47 to 71, right, are we or 1951 to 71,
[Guest]: let's say when the NRC was done, those 20 years, we know that so much of movement has
[Guest]: happened.
[Guest]: How are we going to deal with this?
[Guest]: Are we going to sort of let everyone be here, then over a period of time, you know, Assamese
[Guest]: are going to become a minority, right?
[Guest]: So there is that concern, which is there.
[Guest]: So you have to understand that there is a real problem, which they have to deal with,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: Now, in the post emergency period, you know, as with many other parts of India, the politics
[Guest]: of Assam tends to get quite scrambled, right?
[Guest]: About a year after the emergency comes to an end, you have a first Janata government
[Guest]: coming to power in this thing.
[Guest]: And then subsequently, when Mrs. Gandhi comes back to power, you have, you know, a new sort
[Guest]: of elections which are announced.
[Guest]: And it is at that point of time that the All Assam Students Union, which has been sort
[Guest]: of a student union, which has been talking about and agitating on this issue for almost
[Guest]: a decade by that point of time, really starts making, you know, very urgent, important demands,
[Guest]: saying that the electoral rules have to be revised, and all illegal migrants have to
[Guest]: be struck out of the troll, and that we are not going to sort of this thing, right?
[Guest]: So that becomes a very important demand.
[Guest]: And the various factions of the Janata Party, which includes the Bharatiya Jansangh, which
[Guest]: later becomes a BJP, all come out in various forms of support for the thing, right?
[Guest]: And over the next five years, effectively, 1980-1985, you have a series of negotiations
[Guest]: between the student movements in Assam and the central governments under Prime Ministers
[Guest]: Indira Gandhi and Rajiv Gandhi, which results in the Assam Accord of 1985, right?
[Guest]: And the Assam Accord of 1995, effectively, is some kind of a compromise, right?
[Guest]: Because when the talks begin, the Assamese, you know, Students Union wants the cutoff
[Guest]: date initially for determining migrants to be the NRC of 1951.
[Guest]: But then there is a moment where they say, why not choose 1966, because 64-65 are these
[Guest]: top years.
[Guest]: So, you know, you know, after that, we can do it.
[Guest]: But Indira Gandhi is very clear that, listen, it has to be 71.
[Guest]: Because I have done a deal with Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, and, you know, we can't go back on
[Guest]: that stuff, right?
[Guest]: So there is that is what is at the nub of these very protracted discussions about saying,
[Guest]: what is the point at which we have to choose in order to make these people come through,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: Now, and ultimately, the Assam Accords of 1985, basically says that 1966 becomes the
[Guest]: base year.
[Guest]: So, all migrants who came before 1966 would be deemed as Indian citizens, right?
[Guest]: Now, those who came to India between 1966 and 71, which is the period that Indira Gandhi
[Guest]: was very concerned about, should register themselves as foreigners, right?
[Guest]: Migrants will have to be eligible to apply for citizenship after a period of 10 years.
[Guest]: For those 10 years, they will not be allowed to come on the electoral roll of Assam, right?
[Guest]: However, they were allowed to hold something like passports for Indian government, right?
[Guest]: So you don't have citizenship, but you have travel documents which are given to you.
[Guest]: And anyone who came after 24th of March 1971 is an illegal immigrant, right?
[Guest]: So you come up with this kind of a compromise thing.
[Guest]: And the government of India says that, listen, we will enact this, we will revise the citizenship
[Amit Varma]: rolls.
[Amit Varma]: A tangential question, though, just in practical terms, how do they determine who came when?
[Amit Varma]: Because you know, what documents kind of proved that and I'm sure Jugaad can be done for those
[Amit Varma]: who have the smarts, but otherwise,
[Guest]: I mean, so that has always been the problem, right?
[Guest]: But the thing is that in order to give the Assamese a sense that listen, their state
[Guest]: is not being run over by this thing.
[Guest]: And and also, you know, frankly, both during the Assam Accords and this thing, they were
[Guest]: Muslim groups as well, which ultimately sort of signed up to these things, simply because
[Guest]: they felt it will enable to put their own questions of citizenship to rest, right?
[Unknown]: Because you know, the closure, right?
[Guest]: So there's an argument that listen, my, you know, forefathers came in the early 19th,
[Guest]: 20th century to the to this part of Assam, you know, why should I sort of be constantly
[Guest]: under question mark?
[Guest]: Yeah, yeah.
[Guest]: So I'd rather have closure, right?
[Guest]: So, so everybody feels that, you know, so anyway, but the problem was that once the
[Guest]: Accord is signed, the actual implementation of it never really happens, simply because
[Guest]: of these various kinds of complexities and so on, right?
[Guest]: And there is, of course, also a political dimension to it.
[Guest]: The, you know, the Congress Party is seen as pro-immigrant, simply because it is benefiting
[Guest]: from some kind of a vote bank, right?
[Guest]: And that perception is also sharpened when in 1980, particularly, when Mrs. Gandhi, you
[Guest]: know, makes the chief minister of Assam, a lady of Muslim origin called Anwara Taimur,
[Guest]: who was the first Muslim woman chief minister of any state in India, as the chief minister
[Guest]: of Assam.
[Guest]: And, you know, that is seen as, you know, somehow legitimizing this brand of politics
[Guest]: of, you know, giving shelter to migrants.
[Guest]: There's another thing which happens, which is very interesting, during this period, there's
[Guest]: an act which is passed in 1983, called the Illegal Migrants Determination by Tribunals
[Guest]: Act.
[Guest]: Now, what, by saying that, what they say is that we'll set up tribunals, which will weed
[Guest]: out illegal migrants, yeah, so we are catering to your demand.
[Guest]: But actually, the provisions of the act are that it was incumbent upon neighbors of suspected
[Guest]: illegal immigrants to go and complain about them, right?
[Guest]: So effectively, what the government was bargaining was that we could bring in such a law.
[Guest]: People would, you could tell the people of Assam that, listen, we have done something
[Guest]: for you.
[Guest]: But at the same time, you put the onus on communities, which are unlikely to, you know,
[Guest]: where people do want to work together, you trust that people believe that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: day to day living is more important than these kinds of things.
[Amit Varma]: How do you, how do you even prove, like, if you can't prove where you come from, how do
[Amit Varma]: you even prove where your neighbor came from?
[Guest]: Or whatever.
[Guest]: So the onus is put on the, you know, the complainant has to go and complain and so on, right?
[Guest]: And in fact, the, in the Assam Accords negotiations, the, the, all Assam Students Union and others,
[Guest]: they very strongly wanted this act to be repealed.
[Guest]: Because they said that this is actually preventing us from, you know, doing it because, you know,
[Guest]: there is no real provision there for doing these things.
[Guest]: But at that point of time, when the Rajiv Gandhi government was closing it, all they
[Guest]: said was that we'll give you an assurance that we will look at this particular act.
[Guest]: But it's an act of Parliament.
[Guest]: We can't just as a accord between, you know, two parties, we just cannot tear it up and
[Guest]: so on.
[Guest]: Committee bitha denge.
[Guest]: Whatever, you know, in a sense that they said this.
[Guest]: But it's very interesting because there is an aftermath to this.
[Guest]: Now, there is a public interest litigation filed against this act in the IMDT.
[Guest]: And the IMDT is actually struck down by the Supreme Court in 2005 as ultra-virus of constitution.
[Guest]: And the person who leads this PIL is the current Chief Minister of Assam, Sarbananda Sonowal,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: So, you can see that there is a strand of the movement within Assam, which is sort of,
[Guest]: you know, made this whole story of illegal immigrants, etc. central, not just in the
[Guest]: context of what the ASU and, you know, the students unions wanted, wanted the point of
[Guest]: time with the Assam Accords, right?
[Guest]: So, effectively, you had a situation where the Assam Accords promised some things, but
[Guest]: they were not able to deliver that.
[Guest]: And it's only from about 2005, mid 2000s, that the talk of doing another round of the
[Guest]: NRC comes back into circulation.
[Guest]: And by that time, you actually have a Congress government in Assam under Tarun Gogoi.
[Guest]: And they feel that, listen, maybe it's time to actually sort of do this because, you know,
[Guest]: at various levels, they are feeling the pressure, right?
[Guest]: And as I said, one of the interesting things about the NRC exercise in Assam, the most
[Guest]: recent one, which is proven to be a, you know, sort of an albatross around the state's neck,
[Guest]: was that various groups and political parties wanted it for a variety of reasons, right?
[Guest]: So, of course, you had the Assamese and the Kelondya sort of groups, you know, who said
[Guest]: that, listen, this is very important for us to identify who are the sort of foreigners.
[Guest]: And, you know, there is an Assam Accord which says what the cutoff dates are, we have to
[Guest]: now get this done.
[Guest]: Then you had the Congress Party, which is in power, which says that, listen, it's an
[Guest]: issue on which we have not managed to sort of deliver.
[Guest]: And now, you know, Tarun Gogoi was a three-time chief minister, right?
[Guest]: So, he was a fairly strong politician, he felt that, listen, we could actually shepherd
[Guest]: a process like this through.
[Guest]: Then you have the, you know, BJP and others who come in and make this an important sort
[Guest]: of agenda.
[Guest]: And then subsequently, you know, the issue comes up before the Supreme Court and the
[Guest]: Supreme Court takes charge of the process, right?
[Guest]: So, that's how the NRC actually ends up playing out in the context of Assam.
[Guest]: But what, and it's also noteworthy that a number of intellectuals of Assam, of all political
[Guest]: persuasions, especially liberals, Marxists, you know, people like Hiren Gohen and other
[Guest]: very respected people actually said that maybe this will allow us to put this question behind
[Guest]: us and so on.
[Guest]: But that is proved to be totally a false hope.
[Guest]: Because what has happened is that you eventually have today about 1.9 million people who have
[Guest]: not been able to, you know, prove that they are citizens.
[Guest]: The government has not told us what the sort of religious compositions of these numbers
[Guest]: are.
[Guest]: But the numbers which are doing the rounds are that maybe about a million of them are
[Guest]: actually Hindus, right?
[Guest]: Because Muslims in Assam, because they knew that this was coming, have been actually much
[Guest]: more diligent about trying to do this and been more organized in some ways.
[Guest]: And you know, now you have about a million Hindus who cannot prove it.
[Guest]: And you did not have the Citizenship Amendment Act, which was passed in time for this to
[Guest]: happen, for them to get this backdoor entry into it, right?
[Guest]: And that is the reason now the same party which has spearheaded the movement and won
[Guest]: power in Assam on the basis of the NRC saying that, you know, we are going to do that, which
[Guest]: is a BJP.
[Guest]: And you know, it's its ideologues in Assam have said that, you know, we don't accept
[Guest]: the result of this NRC.
[Guest]: Assam should have an NRC as part of a national NRC.
[Guest]: And before the national NRC, you're going to have the Citizenship Amendment Bill pass
[Amit Varma]: through.
[Amit Varma]: And that the Citizenship Amendment Bill solves the problem of the many Hindus who do not
[Amit Varma]: have papers, because hey, you can just de facto assume therefore that even if they don't
[Amit Varma]: have papers, they're refugees.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: But the current agitation against the CAB is precisely for that reason.
[Guest]: Now, see, the Assam movement has never been particularly conceived of itself as a Hindu
[Guest]: Muslim movement.
[Guest]: As I said, their problem has been with their identities have been conceived of in contradistinction
[Guest]: to Bengalis of various kinds.
[Guest]: It is Hindu Bengalis from the older lot as well as Hindu Bengalis who came from East
[Guest]: Pakistan, many of whom are settled in the Barak Valley, right?
[Guest]: So for people of the Ramaputra Valley, you know, the fact that, you know, that is one
[Guest]: issue.
[Guest]: There is the various forms of Muslim migrants from East Pakistan, Bangladesh, who have come
[Guest]: in over a period of time, right?
[Guest]: So the Assamese demand today in protest against the CAB is actually not a Hindu versus Muslim
[Guest]: one primarily, though there are obviously like all movements, they have various strands
[Guest]: of them.
[Guest]: But, but the main strand is of saying, listen, the CAB cuts against the promise of the Assam
[Guest]: Accords.
[Guest]: In the Assam Accords, you said that, listen, these are the three principles by which you
[Guest]: are going to determine who is a citizen, who is not.
[Guest]: So why are you creating a backdoor to allow more people to become citizens, right?
[Guest]: That may serve your Hindutva agenda in the broader sense, it may, you know, help you
[Guest]: give you a shot in the arm in Bengal.
[Guest]: But it's going to sort of once again put us into jeopardy because our problem is that
[Guest]: we are more concerned about number of Bengali speakers in the state rather than about whether
[Guest]: they are primarily Hindu or Muslim, right?
[Amit Varma]: So that problem has a history.
[Amit Varma]: And I just want to step back here for a second, it's very easy for liberals to sort of look
[Amit Varma]: at the protests in Assam and say that, oh, you know, they're being xenophobic because
[Amit Varma]: they're against migration.
[Amit Varma]: But I just want to shift the frame of reference slightly, for example, right now we have this
[Amit Varma]: default frame of reference that we belong to India.
[Amit Varma]: And when we look back on what our freedom fighters did in the 1910s or 20s and all that,
[Amit Varma]: it seems very virtuous.
[Amit Varma]: But if you shift the frame of reference, you know, one step upwards to the British Empire
[Amit Varma]: as such, they looked at those acts as seditious for them.
[Amit Varma]: Bhagat Singh is not a freedom fighter, but a terrorist.
[Amit Varma]: Similarly, let's shift the frame of reference from the Indian point of view, to perhaps
[Amit Varma]: the Assamese point of view.
[Amit Varma]: And here I'm going to quote a para from Sanjeev Barua, whose great book India Against Itself
[Amit Varma]: you recommended to me and which I link from the show notes, where he says, quote, there
[Amit Varma]: is a long history of resistance to colonial and postcolonial rulers, treating the territory
[Amit Varma]: as land without people, or land with barely any people, frontiers are not empty places.
[Amit Varma]: It is unequal political power and often conquest that turns some people's lands into the frontiers
[Amit Varma]: of other people.
[Amit Varma]: Efforts to reclaim their ancestral lands and the local past and to assert the historical
[Amit Varma]: presence of political communities against the discourse of power have been dominant
[Amit Varma]: themes in the politics of Assam and Northeast India for nearly a century, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And everything you're saying ties into that in the sense that you have these Assamese
[Amit Varma]: people, they're being ruled by these colonial oppressors.
[Amit Varma]: These colonial oppressors then foist, you know, a layer of administrators above them
[Amit Varma]: who tend to be these upper caste Bengali Hindus from Silhet.
[Amit Varma]: And then because they want to sort of cultivate Assam and get more agricultural revenue and
[Amit Varma]: so on, they enable the large scale migration of Bengali Muslims now from what later became
[Amit Varma]: East Bengal.
[Amit Varma]: And for them, it is all of these people coming into their land and intermingling.
[Amit Varma]: And the questions that you have to ask is, and it's a similar question to what you ask
[Amit Varma]: about Kashmir, is that it's fine, we can be proud of India as it is, you know, we managed
[Amit Varma]: to integrate so many states and so much diversity.
[Amit Varma]: But on the one hand, what really was the will of the people?
[Amit Varma]: Did we ever ascertain that?
[Amit Varma]: And second, as in the case of Kashmir, though, perhaps to a greater extent, who are the people,
[Amit Varma]: you know, you have to keep then redefining that, you know, so it's a much more complex
[Amit Varma]: problem that is there going back to as far back as our very own freedom struggle.
[Amit Varma]: And it's a quest for identity, which as Indians or as whatever other sub nationalisms we might
[Amit Varma]: have sorted out, but the Assamese haven't sorted out and that is a ferment that is there.
[Guest]: No, and, you know, I entirely agree with you, I think these are sort of projects and problems
[Guest]: of sub nationalism and the ways to cope with it.
[Guest]: And what the relationship of these sub nationalism movements of various kinds to Indian nationalism
[Guest]: is has never been a settled question.
[Guest]: But as I said, one of the things that the sort of founding generation of this country,
[Guest]: particularly with the Constitution and the early years, attempted to do was to say that,
[Guest]: listen, we have to recognize these diversities and find various ways of this, right.
[Guest]: So, you know, everyone today knows Article 370, thanks to its being sort of thrown under
[Guest]: the dustbin of history, but there is Article 371 as well, right, which actually makes various
[Guest]: kinds of exceptions and various kinds of asymmetric provisions for various parts of India, including
[Guest]: the states of the Northeast, right.
[Guest]: In the Northeast itself, we've had various other kinds of things like the inner line
[Guest]: permit system, right, which is there to prevent so called outsiders from coming in, right.
[Guest]: And which gives this thing, there's a sixth schedule of the Indian Constitution, right,
[Guest]: which again says that for scheduled tribes within certain areas of Northeast, there will
[Guest]: be different kinds of provisions, right.
[Guest]: So the Indian Constitution as a document is actually built on these kinds of asymmetries
[Guest]: and an attempt to say that we need to have a flexible enough framework.
[Guest]: And what the Assamese today are demanding is that we respect their sub nationalist sort
[Guest]: of agenda and history, not tear up the Assam Accords, which is an accord signed between
[Guest]: the, you know, representatives of the people of Assam and the central government of India
[Guest]: through a unilateral act, they say that it is opposed to federalism.
[Guest]: In fact, you know, what is very interesting is that the earlier debates, you know, after
[Guest]: independence of Assamese, in Assam's relationship to India, used to be couched in the language
[Guest]: of federalism, in the language of political economy, you know, it was always felt that
[Guest]: Assam is a state where, you know, resources are being extracted from but production is
[Guest]: never happening.
[Guest]: You know, there were all these debates about situating additional oil refineries within,
[Guest]: you know, there was an oil refinery, which the government of India and its wisdom decided
[Guest]: would be in Baroni.
[Guest]: But through oil pipelines, you know, running through Assam and people felt very strongly
[Guest]: that why not development for Assam, right.
[Guest]: So issues of identity, therefore, I don't think are purely only about history, they're
[Guest]: also about your relationship to the larger entity that you're a part of what is the nature
[Guest]: of your political economy, which allows those things to happen, right.
[Guest]: At this point of time, because of a certain political conjuncture, you know, we tend to
[Guest]: view this as primarily driven through these things, right.
[Guest]: And but I think, if you want to look ahead, and think of what might be solutions to the
[Guest]: problem, which are more consonant with the kind of, you know, liberal constitutional
[Guest]: structure that we adopted, then we may have to think about other things, right.
[Guest]: And this is not just the talk of academics, so to speak, you know, there's a very important
[Guest]: article written by Mr. GK Pillai, who was a former Home Secretary, and who knows the
[Guest]: Northeast very well, when the NRC exercise had concluded in Assam.
[Guest]: And he says, listen, when there are so many people who have been determined to be effectively
[Guest]: not citizens of India, you know, it is not a problem only for Assam, it is a problem
[Guest]: for all of India.
[Guest]: And we have to help Assam deal with this problem, by which I think he was hinting that, you
[Guest]: know, maybe other parts of India should be more welcoming of these people, we have to
[Guest]: give them various kinds of long term work permits effectively to stay in India, find
[Guest]: other parts of citizenship to them, if they don't want to go back.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: Now, we cannot just say that, listen, what are we going to do with these people?
[Guest]: And this idea that we are now taking as almost fait accompli, that all of these people have
[Guest]: to be herded into these various kinds of detention centers, in Assam and, you know, coming up
[Guest]: elsewhere with NRC being nationalized.
[Guest]: It's an extraordinarily sort of, you know, illiberal solution to a problem.
[Guest]: You know, these are kinds of issues which state after state is grappling with, you know,
[Guest]: if there is one issue, which is, I think, you know, most liberal societies are confronted
[Guest]: with that of immigration.
[Guest]: This is our immigrant problem.
[Guest]: You know, we have to think about it, you know, in more careful terms, rather than succumb
[Guest]: to this nativism of saying that, listen, so yes, there is a problem that the Assamese
[Guest]: believe.
[Guest]: Now, the BJP, I think has compounded its own problems in Assam in an important way, right?
[Guest]: Because on the one hand, when it came to power in 2016, the BJP presented itself as a Hilandiya
[Guest]: Sarkar, right?
[Guest]: As a, you know, government of the sort of native Assamese, ethnic Assamese, so to speak.
[Guest]: But then its core base had always been in the Barak Valley where they were Bengali Hindus.
[Guest]: That has always been where their thing is.
[Guest]: Now, in order to paper over the cracks of the, you know, these things it said latched
[Guest]: on to the NRC bandwagon and aggressively pushed it.
[Guest]: Then now that the NRC has backfired, because perhaps up to a million Hindus are out of
[Guest]: this charter, then you bring the CAB, but the CAB then means the Brahmaputra Valley
[Guest]: is now saying that, sorry, you know, this does not fly with us because, you know, you
[Guest]: are going back on everything, right?
[Guest]: So, so there is a contradiction in the BJP's own stance, and which is why I think they
[Guest]: are now at a, you know, fairly tricky point in the way that they cope with the particular
[Guest]: issue in Assam itself.
[Guest]: But there is another very interesting provision to the amendment bill, and now they act as
[Guest]: it stands amended, right?
[Guest]: So, the bill actually says very clearly that none of these provisions about, you know,
[Guest]: these various kinds of things will apply to the areas where the inner line and the six
[Guest]: scheduled areas of the constitution, right?
[Guest]: Now, this is, I think, intended as a sob to the other smaller states in the Northeast,
[Guest]: where also the BJP has been making some inroads, right?
[Guest]: So, the inner line, as we know, is a, you know, you need permits, etc, to sort of move
[Guest]: in there.
[Guest]: And it gives various kinds of rights to the indigenous, effectively tribal, they are the
[Guest]: scheduled tribes, right?
[Guest]: Six scheduled inner line, inner line more so and now the inner line currently is, was
[Guest]: originally operational in Arunachal Pradesh, Mizoram and Nagaland.
[Guest]: You know, as this bill was being tabled in Parliament, the inner line has been extended
[Guest]: to include Manipur, because they have a BJP government there and the BJP government, they
[Guest]: are saying, then why should we then, because the concern is that somehow if the inner line,
[Guest]: if this provision is not there, all of those naturalized citizens who are Hindus, if they
[Guest]: do not find place in Assam, they will have to come to this other states of Northeast,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: So, there is a huge concern.
[Guest]: But actually speaking, even this is a bit of an eye wash.
[Guest]: What it does is to allow the BJP to say that we are taking into account the concerns of
[Guest]: the smaller states.
[Guest]: But actually, it does not change a thing in reality.
[Guest]: Because between the inner line and the sixth schedule, they already turn on the difference
[Guest]: between the indigene who are the scheduled tribes and others who are Indian citizens
[Guest]: normally, so to speak.
[Guest]: So, unless and until there is some extraordinary way by which those who are being naturalized
[Guest]: as Indian citizens can also become scheduled tribes, they are not going to be able to get
[Guest]: any more or any less benefits than other Indian citizens in that area will.
[Amit Varma]: So, the provision is just random political posturing.
[Guest]: It's just a random political posturing, which is there just to buy time.
[Guest]: And the reality is that you can only buy this much time, because the peoples of those areas
[Guest]: are highly sensitive to these problems, which is what I was saying that, you know, this
[Guest]: attempt to play these various kinds of, you know, religiously driven politics in the Northeast
[Guest]: can actually end up tearing the region apart in very important ways.
[Guest]: And I think we have to be mindful of what exactly is happening there.
[Guest]: So, even as we are focusing on the protests, which are happening in other parts of India,
[Guest]: let's understand that Northeast of India is also at a very crucial point in its history,
[Guest]: just like Kashmir is, right?
[Guest]: I mean, in a sense, and there, I think there is a very important parallel, at least to
[Guest]: my mind, between what happens in the case of Assam and the Northeast and what's happening
[Guest]: in Kashmir, right?
[Guest]: Which I think is fundamentally a problem of the BJP government's approach to federalism,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: Article 370 also came out as a result of a compact between the Constituent Assembly of
[Guest]: India and Sheikh Abdullah and his colleagues.
[Guest]: It was negotiated over five months, that was unilaterally torn up and thrown in.
[Guest]: Much the same is what the Assamese of fear are happening with the Assam Accords.
[Guest]: Now, this is a fundamental problem of federalism.
[Guest]: In the 370 case, it was very sad to note that many parties like DDP, etc, which were created
[Guest]: on the platform of federalism, actually ended up supporting that.
[Guest]: You know, a lot of others have supported the current sets of bill, but of course, a lot
[Guest]: of other states now, 11 by last count, have said that they're not going to allow the NRC
[Guest]: to happen, right?
[Guest]: So, in a sense, this is an issue as much about federalism as about other kinds of, you know,
[Guest]: questions of equity, other principles, which are enshrined in the Constitution.
[Amit Varma]: And my question to you would be, look, whatever I've written and read about Kashmir, and you
[Amit Varma]: know, after the episode that you and I did together, my sense was that what has happened
[Amit Varma]: in Kashmir this year is irreversible.
[Amit Varma]: I think we will suffer the consequences for decades, because of the sort of alienation
[Amit Varma]: that you've definitely created among the people there with these four months of internet blockout
[Amit Varma]: and by gifting them what Mr. Shah calls normalcy.
[Amit Varma]: Give me a sense of how close are the events in Assam, if not the rest of the country,
[Amit Varma]: also close to reaching a sort of an irreversible stage where you can't turn the clock back
[Amit Varma]: where you've created schisms, and you've created fault lines, or deepened fault lines, to an
[Amit Varma]: extent where it's very hard to undo the damage.
[Guest]: No, I think definitely in the context of Assam and the Ramaputra Valley, we have, you know,
[Guest]: turned the clock back to a situation which was much more violent, you know, people who
[Guest]: might have read newspapers in the early 1980s, you know, would routinely come across news
[Guest]: about what is happening in Assam and that was a very important, very agitated period
[Guest]: in Assamese history, you know, there's the infamous massacre in Nellie, 1983, you know,
[Guest]: where maybe up to 3000 migrants were effectively seen as illegal migrants were set upon by
[Guest]: a group of indigenous plains tribals and massacred in a matter of hours, right?
[Guest]: I mean, you know, there are people like Shekhar Gupta, who reported from there, who still refer
[Amit Varma]: to that as a touchpoint in terms of their memory.
[Amit Varma]: And imagine if 3000 migrants were massacred, not in Nellie, but in Delhi.
[Guest]: Yeah, again, we'll have to check the exact number, but I think the official figures are
[Guest]: lesser, but the unofficial toll puts it at 3000.
[Guest]: And that, you know, the fact that we might actually be looking at going back to a period
[Guest]: of such intense ethnic hostility and rivalry, to me is a very dangerous sign of what is
[Guest]: to come.
[Guest]: And see, ultimately, as I said, you know, these are things which can only work if we
[Guest]: have a degree of patience and political judgment to understand that this is a very diverse
[Guest]: country.
[Guest]: You know, if we believe that, listen, there is one agenda, which is going to be set, whether
[Guest]: it is ideological or political, and that we are going to ram this through, then I think
[Guest]: invariably, there'll be a pushback.
[Guest]: The Indira Gandhi years of Indian politics are an object historical lesson for us in
[Guest]: that context, the extraordinary centralization of power under Mrs. Gandhi led to various
[Guest]: kinds of visiparous movements, right, the Punjab, Assam, all of these began in the context
[Guest]: where you had a central government, which was abusing constitutionally vested powers,
[Guest]: in her case, particularly with Article 356, and the imposition of President's Rule, and
[Guest]: of course, subsequently, the emergency provisions, and the imposition of the emergency and all
[Guest]: the other, you know, brutality which went with that.
[Guest]: Now, that, you know, it is if you want to keep this country as a broadly functioning
[Guest]: federation, you know, then I think that degree of excessive centralization is always going
[Guest]: to be problematic, right.
[Guest]: And the dialectic between excessive centralization and devolution of powers to provinces is a
[Guest]: much larger one playing out throughout, you know, modern Indian history and going back
[Guest]: at least to, you know, to several centuries.
[Guest]: So in that sense, we have to learn something from our own history.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, two sort of related questions here.
[Amit Varma]: One is that we had almost at some point assumed that recently, especially after the election
[Amit Varma]: results were out, that the BJP have gained some kind of intellectual hegemony in India
[Amit Varma]: that that finally their side of the story that that their ideology has sort of won the
[Amit Varma]: day.
[Amit Varma]: I was sitting earlier today at Carbox, which should actually be which is actually in Santa
[Amit Varma]: Cruz, but it's okay to call it Carbox.
[Amit Varma]: You mentioned to me that you disagreed with that thinking and you wouldn't call it a hegemony.
[Guest]: Can you elaborate on that?
[Guest]: Well, I mean, the argument about hegemony is basically to say that, listen, you have
[Guest]: a political party, which commands the consent of a majority of people in this country, right.
[Guest]: And every hegemony is always partial.
[Guest]: In fact, by definition, Antonio Gramsci, the person who kind of, you know, came up with
[Guest]: the modern sort of notions of hegemony, the Italian Marxist thinker, Gramsci is, you know,
[Guest]: one of his important points about hegemony is that hegemony is always the interest of
[Guest]: one group, which is laying claim to represent the interests of the rest of the society,
[Guest]: right, to the extent that you're able to persuade the rest of the society, that their interests
[Guest]: are actually best represented by your interest and your platform, you have commanded hegemony,
[Guest]: right.
[Guest]: The other way of thinking about hegemony is that consent in an hegemonic system always
[Guest]: is greater than coercion.
[Guest]: So, you don't need to use the tanda, so to speak, to keep people in check, right.
[Guest]: And in some ways, electoral systems, automatically democratic parliamentary systems like ours
[Guest]: and also other kinds of systems, which are based on electing leaders, do confer a degree
[Guest]: of legitimacy, because we believe in the legitimacy of the process, we may dislike this or that
[Guest]: party, but we will always accept the outcome.
[Guest]: To that extent, you know, there is a mechanism for legitimation for gaining hegemony, which
[Guest]: is there.
[Guest]: But the discussion around hegemony and here, you know, there have been very interesting
[Guest]: writings by Yogendra Yadav, my friend Milan Vaishnav, others have written about this particular
[Guest]: thing is to say, you know, what is the nature of that kind of hegemony and to what extent
[Guest]: have they actually managed to do it, right.
[Guest]: And I think the second sort of victory in 2019, and the increase to a 300 plus majority,
[Guest]: effectively was seen as a great approbation, right.
[Guest]: And again, I don't want to minimize the scale of that victory.
[Guest]: Don't read me wrong.
[Guest]: I mean, I think getting, you know, 35% plus vote share in a first pass the post system
[Guest]: is a formidable achievement for most political parties.
[Guest]: So I wouldn't want to minimize that even one bit.
[Guest]: But I think from there to suggest that listen, hegemony is kind of more or less in place
[Guest]: because you know, 370 just look at it, people just applaud what they are doing, was to perhaps
[Guest]: misunderstand the challenges of hegemony, right.
[Guest]: And to understand that hegemony is a very friable project, you know, what seems as commanding
[Guest]: concept at any point of time, can always be shown up to be not quite what it is.
[Guest]: And I think this moment to me is important, not because I don't know what the political
[Guest]: future of this country is, and so on.
[Guest]: But to me, what it suggests is that we may have exaggerated notions of the BJP's hegemony,
[Guest]: the way in which the law enforcement machinery has been used even in the recent past, not
[Guest]: to mention the way in which the media has been suborned for a while now, and other institutions
[Guest]: have been let loose on political opponents, you know, etc.
[Guest]: I don't want to say anything about the judiciary suggests that, you know, actually speaking,
[Guest]: the margin of coercion seems to be greater than the margin of consent out here.
[Guest]: And the BJP simply cannot take consent for granted.
[Guest]: It cannot assume that just because it has won a majority, a thumping majority, no less,
[Guest]: on the basis of a political platform, that every bit of that platform is, you know, ticked
[Guest]: off by the people irrespective of whether it cuts against their fundamental rights,
[Guest]: and you know, what the protections of the Constitution are.
[Guest]: I think that in that sense, you know, this moment suggests as you know, to invoke a phrase
[Guest]: from the great historian Ranajit Guha, you know, there is dominance, but perhaps without
[Amit Varma]: hegemony.
[Amit Varma]: No, and in fact, you know, that video, which, you know, all of us have seen, which you know,
[Amit Varma]: of Ram Guha being surrounded by those three uniformed cops and sort of dragged away by
[Amit Varma]: the arm was at first heartbreaking, but also heartening, because then it shows you the
[Amit Varma]: power of ideas.
[Amit Varma]: It you know, that three uniform men need to that there is so much fear in the establishment,
[Amit Varma]: that they are striking out with that they feel the need to strike down with the force
[Amit Varma]: of the state with coercion, as you said, and you cannot take consent for granted.
[Amit Varma]: And what is even more heartening, and this is what I want to sort of ask you about next,
[Amit Varma]: as we have spoken about students movements in past episodes.
[Amit Varma]: And this is so incredibly heartening that you have the opposition parties who are pretty
[Amit Varma]: much absent from the fray, who are unable to say anything new or original who are unable
[Amit Varma]: to oppose in constructive ways.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, all of this is happening in a week where Madhya Pradesh I think offered that
[Amit Varma]: if you give blanket to cows, you get gun licenses, some nonsense like that.
[Amit Varma]: And that's a Congress rule state, which is why I say the Congress is a party of Kamal
[Amit Varma]: Nath, not Rahul Gandhi, because in practice, that is what they are.
[Amit Varma]: But leaving that sort of rant aside, it's just incredibly heartening to see so many
[Amit Varma]: students come together.
[Amit Varma]: And these are spontaneous demonstrations in some cases, like in Delhi, for example, the
[Amit Varma]: mobile internet was shut down in large parts in Bangalore section 144 was imposed.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, 144 was imposed in all of Uttar Pradesh 200 million people, which is mind blowing.
[Amit Varma]: And I think pretty unprecedented and, you know, it's beyond colonial, and it's just
[Amit Varma]: incredible.
[Guest]: No, and I think it's also an important moment in the history of student movements and, you
[Guest]: know, in the context of 20th century India itself, right?
[Guest]: Because the students have been a part of much of the mobilization around the nationalist
[Guest]: movement, which happened from 1920 thereabouts, right?
[Guest]: So, they were in the non cooperation movement, Gandhiji called on them to sort of leave their
[Guest]: colleges and schools.
[Guest]: They were part of the civil disobedience movement, they were very fundamentally a part of the
[Guest]: Quit India movement of 1942.
[Guest]: And then, you know, we have some very fine historical accounts of their involvement in
[Guest]: those things.
[Guest]: Post independence, you know, there was the sense that, listen, now it's time for students
[Guest]: to focus on national development and their own betterment and, you know, these kinds
[Amit Varma]: of things.
[Amit Varma]: Ambedkar's warning about, you know, why don't you give up the grammar of anarchy, we have
[Amit Varma]: one freedom now as if.
[Guest]: Yeah, but that was especially applicable to the students, you know, in 1955, I think there
[Guest]: was a, you know, a student unrest and a couple of students were shot down in Patna.
[Guest]: And Jawaharlal Nehru actually goes there.
[Guest]: And he says that, you know, it is one thing to engage in intellectual politics.
[Guest]: But this kind of demonstration, dharna and all that stuff is unacceptable, right?
[Guest]: So, there is this, you know, standard reflex that listen, you guys should contribute to
[Guest]: the nation rather than, you know, so the metaphor of discipline.
[Guest]: At which point the students should have said, okay, boomer to him.
[Guest]: Well, yeah.
[Guest]: So, so, so those kinds of, you know, it is a, let's put it this way, I mean, you know,
[Guest]: that strain of thinking has been quite ingrained in post-colonial India, despite this.
[Guest]: But that has never stopped students movements from being important, right?
[Guest]: If you think of practically every major state reorganization movement, right, around linguistic
[Guest]: nationalism, sub nationalism, you know, questions of regional identity, and so on, you know,
[Guest]: there's a Samyukta Maharashtra movement, you think of, you know, the Andhra movement, which
[Guest]: began with, you know, if you think of, say, the anti Hindi agitations in Tamil Nadu, think
[Guest]: of Assam, which we've spoken about, all of these were, you know, students were pretty
[Guest]: much, you know, front and center, right?
[Guest]: But from the late 60s, there is a certain turn in this kind of student and in fact,
[Guest]: I think from that point, you should perhaps start calling it as youth sort of movements
[Guest]: and youth politics, because the youth as a category come into its own, really from the
[Guest]: late 1960s, right, because that's when your, you know, your institutions of higher education
[Guest]: start getting significant numbers, there's an expansion of campuses, more people staying
[Guest]: on campus.
[Guest]: So campus issues become very important, right?
[Guest]: Even now, the precursor to this was like things around what's happening in campuses, JNU,
[Guest]: you know, it's not just that, you know, this happened today, right?
[Guest]: So those kinds of issues.
[Guest]: So in a sense, the youth as an autonomous kind of force in Indian politics really, again,
[Guest]: just like as it happens globally, everywhere, you know, 67, 68, thereabouts is very important
[Guest]: in India, right?
[Guest]: And particularly in the context of West Bengal with the Naxalbari movement, a lot of young
[Guest]: students who move out, go to the countryside to agitate, you know, spread the flame of
[Guest]: revolution, etc.
[Guest]: There's a huge crackdown upon them.
[Guest]: But that is an important moment, right?
[Guest]: That's also incidentally, an important moment in Pakistan, and the student movement in Pakistan
[Guest]: actually deposes Ayub Khan in 1969, as we've sort of discussed in that episode on Bangladesh.
[Guest]: But you fast forward to late 1973-74, right?
[Guest]: You have students movements in two states in India, in Gujarat, the Narmad movement,
[Guest]: and then in Bihar, both of which are again, you know, start around student issues, then
[Guest]: morph into bigger things.
[Guest]: And then ultimately, Jayaprakash Narayan, you know, comes in as the person who's providing
[Amit Varma]: moral and national...
[Amit Varma]: The two of the young leaders who came up in the student movement in Bihar were Lalu Prasad
[Guest]: and Nitish Yadav.
[Guest]: If you think about Indian politics today, practically every major leader that you can
[Guest]: think of, has entered politics in that crucible of the period between 1974 and 77.
[Guest]: It's as true of Congress Party as it is of the opposition.
[Amit Varma]: In fact...
[Guest]: Jaitley being a student leader and...
[Guest]: Sushma Swaraj, Mr. Modi himself, you know, was there.
[Guest]: You look beyond, look at the OBC leadership of North India, as you talked about, right?
[Guest]: Lalu Yadav, Nitish Kumar, come to my state, Tamil Nadu, I mean, Stalin, who was the chief
[Guest]: minister of the, you know, was his father, but you know, he was in the forefront of agitation,
[Guest]: got beaten up, was in custody, and so on.
[Guest]: All of these leaders actually came to the fore.
[Guest]: So in a sense, that was an extraordinary moment, where this conjuncture of youth movements,
[Guest]: the anti-emergency, subsequent anti-emergency protests, and you know, that period really
[Guest]: created a new set of leadership with new sets of ideas, and so on.
[Guest]: If you fast forward to 1990 or thereabouts, you know, people of our generation, we will
[Guest]: remove the anti-Mandal thing, right, which is not a progressive thing, as perhaps you
[Guest]: and I will think about it, right?
[Guest]: But what is interesting about the current moment, I think, is that its scale and scope
[Guest]: is much wider, it is much more spontaneous, less organized, less dependent on any kind
[Guest]: of external direction, at least until this point of time, on what, unlike this thing,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: So in that sense, I think it was Pratap Bhanu Mehta, who wrote in his column day before
[Guest]: yesterday, that this is the largest student sort of movement we've seen since 1974.
[Guest]: And I think he's right.
[Guest]: Which, of course, was followed by the emergency then.
[Guest]: That's right.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: But, you know, again, history, you know, may not repeat itself, it may rhyme.
[Guest]: But the, the reality is that, you know, in that sense, this has been quite a striking
[Guest]: thing for us to watch.
[Guest]: And I think, again, you know, we should not be parochial, just look at Indian history.
[Guest]: But I think look around, I mean, see what has happened in the Arab Spring in various
[Guest]: countries in the world, right?
[Guest]: Because this is politics driven by, you know, various forms of connectivity, which simply
[Guest]: were not available to an earlier generation, right?
[Guest]: I mean, the speed with which, you know, even WhatsApp messages are going around saying,
[Guest]: are you going to this protest?
[Guest]: Here is a list of lawyers, if you get caught up, just call one of them.
[Amit Varma]: It's a globalized spread of ideas, and just to see some of the placards, like one particularly
[Amit Varma]: memorable placard in Bombay was, Jab Hindu-Muslim Raazi toh kya karega, Naazji?
[Guest]: Yes, and, and of course, you know, as with many of these movements in the past, but more
[Guest]: so today, the presence of young women, you know, and in such large numbers, you know,
[Guest]: and leading that the formation of ideas, it's, it is very interesting.
[Guest]: But at the same time, you know, I think history, including Indian history, suggests that student
[Guest]: movements always have had their limitations.
[Guest]: So it is important to recognize those as well, you know, not to assume that, you know, there
[Guest]: are some kind of inbuilt problems, which is that, you know, the historian Eric Hobsbawm
[Guest]: used to say the problem with student generations is that they only last for three or four years,
[Amit Varma]: right?
[Amit Varma]: So you won't have a permanent leadership structure emerging and something building over time,
[Amit Varma]: these kids will be gone in a couple of years, they'll be doing jobs, they'll be doing MBAs.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, this is not just a student movement of the youth movement.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: That's what I was saying.
[Guest]: You know, it's a youth movement, which has also galvanized so many other people, right?
[Amit Varma]: And I'm also struck by the different ways of protesting, especially by the women.
[Amit Varma]: For example, one, there is that iconic video of those, you know, first, there's this guy
[Amit Varma]: who's trying to stop his lady friends from, you know, going out against the police and
[Amit Varma]: confronting them.
[Amit Varma]: And the cops come and drag him away.
[Amit Varma]: And then all these women go and surround him and they, you know, save him from the lattice.
[Amit Varma]: And the other very striking image of this young girl with a placard, and the placard
[Amit Varma]: says that my father wants me to study history, but I want to make it and she's offering a
[Amit Varma]: rose to the sheepish policeman.
[Amit Varma]: Those are beautiful images.
[Guest]: It's so Gandhian also.
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: And, you know, I think there is one thing that these young people have realized and
[Guest]: made us all realize, I think, which is, I think Gandhi would have thought of it as his
[Guest]: fundamental point, which he used to say is abhaya, to be fearless, right?
[Guest]: I think what has, and this is the reason I say that, you know, the hegemony of the BJP
[Guest]: seems more friable and brittle than what we thought.
[Amit Varma]: Because today it is a state which is scared and the citizens are standing up.
[Guest]: They are fearless, like you said.
[Guest]: So again, I will say that, you know, it's important to understand that this is going
[Guest]: to be a long drawn out process, you know, I think this kind of people coming out, standing
[Guest]: up for their constitutionally guaranteed rights, their, you know, cherished notions of what
[Guest]: it means to be an Indian, etc. is important.
[Guest]: But there is also a danger that I increasingly find with our world of social media that,
[Guest]: you know, we can become something of an echo chamber.
[Guest]: I mean, let's also understand that there must be a lot of people out there who do not accept
[Guest]: what is happening, who may think that these laws are right, who in due course will be
[Guest]: mobilizing as we've already seen ABVP and other student groups trying to mobilize.
[Guest]: At this point of time, as you're saying, yes, I think it has come as a surprise, if not
[Guest]: a shock, that things could sort of snowball out of control so quickly.
[Guest]: But I think the success of this moment will also, you know, as you said, have to be measured
[Guest]: through various yardstick.
[Guest]: And, you know, as a former army person, you know, I'm always aware of the coercive sort
[Guest]: of power which the Indian state wheels, you know, I've had an insider's view of what that
[Amit Varma]: means.
[Amit Varma]: No, maybe this can be a crucible through which future leaders can emerge and also, you know,
[Amit Varma]: I used to worry about liberal elite echo chambers, but 100,000 people at Azad Maidan is not an
[Guest]: echo chamber.
[Guest]: Absolutely, yeah, precisely.
[Guest]: All I'm trying to say is that, you know, it puts paid to this idea that, listen, you know,
[Guest]: in a sense, the ideological battle is over, right, that the battle of ideas and of politics
[Guest]: is over.
[Guest]: Now it is all about striking these low kind of compromises to which coalition government
[Guest]: can stop whom, where.
[Guest]: I think that story will continue, as you said, you know, the fate of the opposition and that
[Guest]: of the Congress Party is a discussion for another day.
[Guest]: But at this point of time, you know, I think it's definitely heartening to see that there
[Guest]: is so much there.
[Guest]: And I think, you know, we have to remember one thing, you know, see, democracy is a very
[Guest]: peculiar form of a political system, you know, because say, unlike older forms of systems,
[Guest]: there is no divine right to rule.
[Guest]: There is no divinely sanctioned ruling class who can tell you what you do.
[Guest]: Unlike say the socialist regimes of the 20th century, you don't have an ideology which
[Guest]: is going to prescribe to you what you have to do.
[Guest]: So democracy is fundamentally about learning from our own experience.
[Guest]: And I think history and our experience is very important, I think it's important constantly
[Guest]: to revisit that, to learn from it, and to make history as much as we read it.
[Amit Varma]: And on these wise words, since we are running out of studio time, we could have spoken for
[Amit Varma]: another couple of hours, and I'm going to have to thank you for coming on the show.
[Amit Varma]: It's always such a pleasure and such a learning experience for me, Sreenath.
[Guest]: No, not at all.
[Guest]: It's always great to be here and to have this opportunity to have a sustained conversation
[Amit Varma]: with you.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this podcast, listen, I recommend you listen to another
[Amit Varma]: podcast.
[Amit Varma]: It's called Interpreting India.
[Amit Varma]: And in fact, it's hosted by Sreenath.
[Amit Varma]: It's done by Carnegie where he works.
[Amit Varma]: So do a Google search for Interpreting India and check that out.
[Amit Varma]: That's worth listening to.
[Amit Varma]: You should also head on over to Amazon and buy Sreenath's excellent books.
[Amit Varma]: My previous episodes with him will be linked in the show notes at cnuncine.in.
[Amit Varma]: Check those out.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow Sreenath on Twitter as SreenathRaghava3.
[Amit Varma]: That is a three instead of the N at the end.
[Amit Varma]: So at SreenathRaghava3, you can follow me on Twitter at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: You can browse past episodes of The Seen and the Unseen at cnuncine.in and thinkpragati.com.
[Amit Varma]: The Seen and the Unseen is supported by the Takshashila Institution.
[Amit Varma]: Visit takshashila.org.in to find out more about their many public policy courses.
[Amit Varma]: For one of the postgraduate courses, which starts in January, in fact, I teach a module
[Amit Varma]: on how to write an op-ed.
[Amit Varma]: So if you want to become a master at it, that's something to consider.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for listening.